## Hydrobiologia

Role of winds and tides in timing of beach strandings, occurrence, and significance of swarms of the jellyfish Crambione mastigophora Mass nineteen oh three (Scyphozoa: Rhizostomeae: Catostylid ...


## PRIMARY RESEARCH PAPER

Role of winds and tides in timing of beach strandings, occurrence, and significance of swarms of the jellyfish Crambione mastigophora Mass nineteen oh three (Scyphozoa: Rhizostomeae: Catostylidae) in north-western Australia

Abstract Very large swarms of the red jellyfish Crambione mastigophora in north-western Australia disrupt swimming on tourist beaches causing economic impacts. In October twenty twelve, jellyfish stranding on Cable Beach (density two point two zero ±zero point four three ind. meters squared) was estimated at fifty-two point eight million individuals or fourteen thousand one hundred seventy-two t wet weight along fifteen km of beach. Reports of strandings after this period and up to two hundred fifty km south of this location indicate even larger swarm biomass. Strandings of jellyfish were significantly associated with a two-day lag in conditions of small tidal ranges (less than five meters). More than ninety percent of strandings occurred two days after winds were blowing onshore, but with the small number of days when satellite wind data were available during the study period, this result was not statistically significant. Dedicated instrument measurements of meteorological parameters, rather than the indirect measures used in this study (satellite winds and modeled currents) may improve the predictability of such events and help authorities to plan for and manage swimming activity on beaches. We also show a high incidence of predation by C. mastigophora on bivalve larvae which may have a significant impact on the reproductive output of pearl oyster broodstock in the region.


## Introduction

Jellyfish are a ubiquitous and readily observed component of marine plankton. They may exist in high densities as swarms (aggregations from local or distant sources usually brought together by oceanographic or behavioral processes) or blooms (high density, locally derived population). The different manifestations of high densities of jellyfish and how they are formed have been reviewed previously. However, there has been recent interest in using and understanding oceanographic processes to develop predictive capacity to forecast when jellyfish might swarm near the shore bring them into contact with swimmers. The extent to which jellyfish biology and behavior can affect swarming and beach stranding has also gained recent attention. Jellyfish swarms at the coast cause other problems such as clogging power and desalination plant seawater intakes and fish mortality in aquaculture farms, and predictive capacity would assist in preparing for or preventing harmful and damaging effects of jellyfish swarms.

Jellyfish swarms and blooms are natural phenomena, but their occurrence is increasingly being associated with anthropogenic disturbance and modification of the world's oceans and coastal seas. Climate change, overfishing and coastal development have all been suggested as contributing to jellyfish swarms and blooms, although the evidence is often equivocal, and the evidence of a worldwide trend in jellyfish swarms and blooms is debated. The jellyfish swarms described in this study occurred in the remote north-western Australia, where anthropogenic impacts are regarded as being very low on a global scale offering an opportunity to examine the drivers of swarms as well as their ecological, social and economic significance.

The jellyfish Crambione mastigophora Maas nineteen oh three is recorded from the eastern Indian Ocean and western Pacific. Despite its apparently common and sometimes abundant occurrence in north-western Australia (this study), Indonesia, the Malayan Archipelago, Sri Lanka and the Truk Islands (Micronesia), there is little published information on C. mastigophora beyond the taxonomic texts of Kramp and Stiansy. C. mastigophora is capable of forming large swarms in north-western Australia where they are a nuisance due to stinging swimmers. Hamner & Dawson categorised it as a putative bloomer on the basis that if they are fished commercially, they must be very abundant, at least seasonally. However, there have been no previous studies anywhere describing the nature, extent, and time course of C. mastigophora swarms. Similarly, there are no published studies on any aspect of the biology of C. mastigophora.

1961), there is little published information on C. mastigophora beyond the taxonomic texts of Kramp (1961) and Stiansy (1929). C. mastigophora is capable of forming large swarms in north-western Australia where they are a nuisance due to stinging swimmers (Marsh & Slack-Smith, 2010). Hamner & Dawson (2009) categorised it as a putative bloomer on the basis that if they are fished commercially (Omori & Nakano, 2001), they must be very abundant, at least seasonally. However, there have been no previous studies any- where describing the nature, extent, and time course of C. mastigophora swarms. Similarly, there are no published studies on any aspect of the biology of C. mastigophora.

This study resulted from an unplanned opportunity which arose when very large swarms of C. mastigophora washed ashore in a small population centre on the only regularly lifeguard patrolled beach in what is a very remote part of Australia in twenty twelve. The purpose of the paper is to record the incidence and scale of these, and earlier C. mastigophora swarms off the western coast of Australia, determine whether wind, currents and tides play an influential and predictable role in beach stranding events of these jellyfish and outline the likely socioeconomic and ecological implications of swarms of this species.


## Materials and methods

Occurrence of swarms

Details on the occurrence of C. mastigophora swarms in nineteen seventy-six, two thousand oh six, two thousand seven, two thousand ten, twenty eleven, twenty twelve, and twenty thirteen were collated from a series of eye witness accounts by the authors and their associates in twenty ten, twenty twelve and twenty thirteen, and others as well as reports to the Western Australian Museum, the Western Australian Department of the Environment, the Broome Shire Council (Cable Beach lifeguard logbooks), the Eighty Mile Beach Caravan Park and from news reports. For the period of detailed investigation on Cable Beach in twenty twelve, daily records of jellyfish strandings were made by Cable Beach lifeguards for the period from twelve August to thirty-one October.


## Biomass of stranded jellyfish

To determine the biomass of jellyfish washed up on Cable Beach, we first sampled jellyfish offshore to determine the size and weight distribution of the jellyfish population. We then compared the size distribution of jellyfish on the beach with those offshore using a Mann-Whitney U test, and finding no difference, we applied the average weight of the jellyfish sampled offshore to counts of jellyfish washed ashore. A total of one hundred fifty-nine individuals of Crambionella mastigophora were collected with a dip net offshore of Gantheaume Point on nineteenth September twenty twelve at seventeen point nine seven seven six one four degrees South, one hundred twenty-two point one seven three three zero zero degrees East from a six-meter boat taking care to collect all individuals that could be reached from the boat in the top five hundred centimeters of water to ensure no bias in size selection. These were collected into buckets and then measured on shore for maximum bell width (diameter) and weighed (whole wet weight) to the nearest one gram on an Accura ACC two zero seven zero RD electronic scale. A further one hundred eighty-six individuals washed up on Cable Beach were measured for maximum bell width on fifth October twenty twelve by collecting all jellyfish from an area four by eight meter quadrat at seventeen point nine three three five five six degrees South, one hundred twenty-two point two zero eight five zero zero degrees East. Biomass in terms of wet weight to size was determined as above, and dry weight and ash-free dry weight were determined by drying samples of jellyfish tissue (principally from the bell) of known wet weight in a Labconco Freezone two point five freeze dryer at negative forty degrees Celsius until constant weight was achieved and then reweighing before ashing at four hundred fifty degrees Celsius for four point five hours and reweighing. Jellyfish tissue was not rinsed in freshwater before drying, so some residual salt may have remained when dried. The mean ratios of wet to dry and wet to ash-free dry weight were then used to calculate biomass for the full-size range of

September twenty twelve. Sites A and B were sampled for prey species, Site C was sampled for medusa size frequency (top right and lower left positions of panel three are seventeen point seven nine degrees South, one hundred twenty-two point three zero degrees East and eighteen point zero three degrees South and one hundred twenty-two point one two degrees East, respectively)

jellyfish sampled. Total organic carbon, total nitrogen content and stable isotopes (carbon thirteen and nitrogen fifteen) were assessed using freeze-dried tissue. Samples were analyzed for nitrogen fifteen and carbon thirteen, using a continuous flow system consisting of a Delta V Plus mass spectrometer connected with a Thermo Flush one one one two via Conflo four following the methods of Paul and Skrzypek.

To determine the biomass of jellyfish washed up on the Cable Beach, we counted all jellyfish in twelve twenty-by-one meter transects at six sites on eighth October twenty twelve. The transects were set out in pairs along two point five kilometers of beach heading south from a site seaward of the Broome Surf Life Saving Club. The location of the first transect was at seventeen point nine three two six three nine degrees South, one hundred twenty-two point two zero eight eight three three degrees East. The sites were five hundred meters apart along the beach, and at each site, two transects were conducted parallel to the shoreline. One transect was near the water's edge, and one transect was near the high-water mark so as to capture the range of densities at each site across the width of the beach. Figure two shows the apparently even distribution of jellyfish across the beach on the day of sampling. The density of jellyfish from both high and low transects was calculated. To calculate total average biomass on the beach, the mean density was calculated from all twelve transects, and this density was converted to wet weight based on the size distribution measured on the same beach three days earlier and the relationship between size and wet weight. To enable the density of jellyfish on the full width of beach to be estimated, we used a conservative estimate of one hundred meter width based on two measurements made from aerial photographs (averaging one hundred fifteen point five meters) of the width of the beach adjacent to the Broome Surf Life Saving Club (one hundred twenty-seven point five meters) and three kilometers to the south (one hundred three point five meters). These measurements were made between the high (six point eight five meters) and low (three point three two meters) tide points for eighth October twenty twelve. A more extensive visual survey of jellyfish on the beach was made by driving a four-wheel-drive vehicle south from the Broome Surf Life Saving Club for five kilometers to Gantheaume Point (seventeen point nine seven zero zero eight three degrees South, one hundred twenty-two point one nine one zero zero zero degrees East) and north for ten kilometers to Coconut Wells (seventeen point eight three eight six one one degrees South, one hundred twenty-two point two zero nine zero two eight degrees East). This fifteen-kilometer survey recorded the southern extent of the strandings, but they may have extended further north as the beach extends a further seven kilometers to a creek and then a further thirteen kilometers north after that. At one-kilometer intervals along with this fifteen-kilometer section of beach, a visual assessment and photograph along with the GPS position were recorded. This survey confirmed that densities measured over the two point five kilometers stretch south of the Broome Surf Life Saving Club were representative of the entire beach.

To examine for diet, samples of live Crambionella mastigophora were collected (as per the description above) from two locations on nineteenth September twenty twelve: Offshore of Gantheaume Point at seventeen point nine six six nine four four degrees South, one hundred twenty-two point one seven eight nine eight nine degrees East and near Dampier Creek in Roebuck Bay at seventeen point nine six seven five three six degrees South, one hundred twenty-two point two four three two eight one degrees East. The jellyfish were measured (as per above) and placed in plastic bags and then on ice. The method of determining prey items followed that of Browne and Kingsford except it was necessary to freeze the samples in order to transport them to the laboratory where fourteen individuals were thawed over one to two hours in seawater filtered through Whatman glass microfiber filters (zero point six to zero point eight micrometers) and then washed in the container to dislodge any prey items adhering to oral arms. Much of the jellyfish disintegrated during this process but otherwise large pieces of intact jellyfish were removed and washed with a wash bottle containing filtered seawater before all the remaining liquid was filtered through one millimeter and sixty-three micrometer sieves. The filtrate was fixed in five percent formalin before later being searched under a dissection microscope Leica M two zero five C, magnification six point three, objective ten times. Prey items were identified to the lowest taxonomic unit possible by an experienced zooplankton biologist. The method used does not permit gelatinous prey items to be identified.


## Wind, tide, sea-surface temperature, chlorophyll-a, and modelled surface currents

The satellite-derived sea-surface chlorophyll-a concentration data are eight-day composited Level-Three global standard mapped images derived from the moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometer aboard the Aqua satellite. The sea-surface temperature data were derived from long-wave eleven micrometer sea-surface temperature algorithm. Only nighttime data were used to avoid any surface skin created by diurnal warming. The satellite-derived sea-surface wind data are from a daily near-real-time product derived from WindSat Polarimetric Radiometer instrument. These satellite images were downloaded from the Remote Sensing Systems under the sponsorship of NASA. The


## Hydrobiologia

time span of the MODIS images is from fourth August, two thousand twelve to thirtieth October, two thousand twelve, and the geographic area covers in one hundred twenty-one to one hundred twenty-three degrees north and seventeen to nineteen degrees south, with a resolution of four kilometers by four kilometers. The satellite wind data are from the same area and time period but with a resolution of zero point two five degrees by zero point two five degrees. For statistical analysis of daily satellite wind data, an average of only the sixteen data points comprising a one degree square (seventeen point five degrees south to eighteen point five degrees south and one hundred twenty-one point zero degrees east to one hundred twenty-two point zero degrees east) immediately off Cable Beach was used. The depth in the area of this grid is zero to one hundred eight meters, with three quarters of the area between thirty and one hundred meters deep. Additional wind speed and direction data (daily averages of anemometer and wind vane) along with tide data were obtained from the land-based Broome station of the Australian Bureau of Meteorology, which is within ten kilometers of all our study sites. The land-based wind data are more readily available than satellite data (which have data gaps) but are less relevant to affecting sea conditions in the offshore location of the jellyfish swarms. In addition, the land-based wind data can be influenced by factors such as the daily land/sea breeze cycle, which sometimes occurs. Modelled surface current data were derived from BOM's OceanMAPS model using the analysis phase data. Model data are available on a zero point one degree by zero point one degree grid with fifty-one layers; the surface layer represents the top five meters and does not take into account tides. Daily surface velocities for the region bounded by seventeen point five degrees south to eighteen point five degrees south and one hundred twenty-one point zero degrees east to one hundred twenty-two point zero degrees east were extracted and spatially averaged to produce a daily time series of current velocity and direction relative to north and magnitude in meters per second for twenty-fourth August two thousand twelve to twentieth October two thousand twelve inclusive. Comparisons of swarm occurrence and the Southern Oscillation Index were made using data reported by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.


## Predictors of beach stranding events

In order to test the hypothesis that the incidence of beach strandings was independent of local wind, current and tide conditions we sought to compare the incidence of jellyfish strandings (nineteen out of fifty-eight days) with the prevailing offshore oceanographic and weather conditions. We compared the conditions on days with strandings to conditions on days without strandings for the fifty-eight day period from twenty-fourth August to twentieth


## Hydrobiologia

October (three days before the first and three days after the last major stranding) using the chi-squared statistic. As Cable Beach is oriented north-south, we were interested in the influence of onshore (north-west through to south-west) and offshore winds and currents (north-east through to south-east). Thus for wind and current, we used the satellite wind/current direction to determine for each day whether the wind/current was predominantly blowing/flowing from each of the north-west (e.g., two hundred seventy degrees to three hundred sixty degrees), south-west, north-east, or south-east quarters. On days where both a morning (around six a.m.) and an evening (around six p.m.) wind reading was available and they were not the same (onshore versus offshore), we used the wind direction from the observation with the highest wind speed. This only occurred on three occasions and it made no difference to the result of the chi-squared hypothesis testing whether we chose the wind direction with the slowest speed or omitted these three data points altogether. When the satellite did not provide any wind data (twenty-three of fifty-eight days), these days were not included in the analyses. For tides, we compared tidal ranges of less than five or greater than or equal to five meters (approximately half the maximum range of nine point eight two meters observed in this period). To calculate the tidal range, we used the difference between the highest and lowest of the semi-diurnal tides for that day. The reason we chose to do the likelihood test on wind direction and tide as categorical variables, in addition to the more dynamical multivariate approach described below, was to attempt to have an easy-to-use decision tool for lifeguards patrolling what is a popular tourist beach.

Logistic regression analysis has previously been used to relate jellyfish presence/absence data to environmental variables. We used a similar approach using the LOGIT module in SYSTAT to determine which predictor variable contributed the best fit to the regression, and which combination of environmental variables best described the relationship between the occurrence of jellyfish strandings and the potential environmental predictor variables of tide range, model current direction and speed, wind speed and wind direction at Broome. We used only environmental variables for which we had data over all the jellyfish sampling dates. For this reason, chlorophyll-a, sea-surface temperature and satellite wind data obtained were not used because of gaps resulting from intermittent cloud cover. A total dataset of fifty-eight days including nineteen days when jellyfish strandings took place


## Hydrobiologia

(stranding events) was analysed. We used a two-staged approach, first modelling the presence/absence of jellyfish strandings with individual environmental variables, and then we applied a backward and forward stepwise regression in SYSTAT to choose the best set of predictive variables. Descriptive measures of goodness of fit provided from the analysis for each variable (log likelihood, receiver operating characteristic analysis, McFadden's rho squared, Cox and Snell R squared and Nagelkerke R squared were used to determine the variables which provided the highest level of prediction). The models with multiple predictors were compared using log likelihood, Aikaike's information criterion and Bayesian information criterion to determine the best model selection. The use of Aikaike's information criterion and Bayesian information criterion is considered more rigorous than likelihood analysis alone in evaluating logistic regression models and their use is described by Neath & Cavanaugh. We have had to ignore the possibility of autocorrelation in the daily observations of stranding events, and we did not account for the circular nature of wind and current direction data (e.g., five degrees is closer to three hundred fifty-five degrees than is three hundred forty degrees). However, we do not think this would have had a large bearing on the analyses, at least for the wind direction as just two values were from the northeast direction (i.e., between zero degrees and ninety degrees). Current directions were more uniformly distributed around the compass.


## Results

Location, occurrence and timing of swarms and beach strandings

Observations and locations of known swarms and beach strandings of C. mastigophora are shown in Fig. one part two and summarised in Electronic Supplementary Material Table one. The earliest swarm recorded in the region was in August nineteen seventy-six when the power plant at Cape Lambert (near Karratha, see Fig. one part two) was forced into an emergency shutdown when the intake pipes became clogged with red jellyfish (see also Electronic Supplementary Material Table one). The largest swarm is likely to have been in April two thousand when high densities of C. mastigophora were observed from the air stretching over one thousand two hundred kilometers from Ningaloo (Fig. one part two) south to Rottnest Island. Photographs of the recent swarms, at Cable Beach (Fig. two part three) and eighty Mile Beach (Fig. two part four) in two thousand twelve and in the water column at Ningaloo in two thousand thirteen (Fig. three), are shown. With the exception of the nineteen seventy-six swarm, the swarms were recorded from two regions: near Broome on the Dampier Peninsula and elsewhere in the southern Kimberley region in two thousand six (September/October), two thousand ten (April), two thousand eleven (September to November) and two thousand twelve (late August to November) and further south of Exmouth and Ningaloo in nineteen eighty-seven, two thousand, two thousand seven, two thousand ten, and two thousand thirteen (always in April/May for these large swarms). Except for the observation of high densities of C. mastigophora offshore of the Dampier Peninsula in April two thousand ten, all swarms in the northern region have been in the late August/September to November period and those in the more southern region occur in April and May. Some non-serious stings to swimmers on Cable Beach in two thousand eleven and two thousand twelve were treated by one of us; it is difficult to compare the size and significance of swarms between years; however, observations recorded in daily log books by life guards at Cable Beach show two thousand six and two thousand twelve as the largest strandings, with swarms in the intervening years not of comparable size.

During two thousand twelve, numbers of C. mastigophora built up from twelve August with the first significant strandings on twenty-seven to twenty-nine August, becoming more dense from twelve to fifteen September (Fig. two part one). The beach was closed to swimmers on twelve September. On subsequent days, when jellyfish were present in large numbers, although the beach was not closed, life guards continued to patrol and advised visitors of the hazard of swimming with the jellyfish. Life guards treated three hundred ninety-six minor stings in September and three hundred thirty-six in October. The last significant stranding was on seventeen October, and C. mastigophora were uncommon by twenty-three October. The jellyfish were present throughout this period, but the very large strandings of many thousands of individuals occurred on twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, twenty-eight, twenty-nine September and one, four, five, eight, nine, ten, twelve, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen October (Fig. four). On days in-between, there were fewer jellyfish washed up but very high densities were being seen offshore. Log book records of the Broome Shire Life Guards and our own observations confirmed very high densities offshore of Cable Beach on three September and at the mouth of Dampier Creek in Roebuck Bay on seventeen September; jellyfish were still very abundant offshore of Gantheaume Point on nineteen September and another large influx was observed offshore of Cable Beach observed on twenty-eight September. In the days following twelve September and as late as twenty September, when we used a vehicle to visit beaches along the coastline to about sixty kilometers north of Broome, small numbers of jellyfish could be observed along the Dampier Peninsula but campers and tourists we interviewed reported no large strandings. We found jellyfish stranded in large numbers from Gantheaume Point as far north as Coconut Wells on eight October. They may have occurred further north as this was as far as observations were made at that time.


## Oceanographic information in relation to jellyfish strandings in two thousand twelve

Tide range varied from one point two five meters to nine point eight two meters during the period twenty-four August to twenty October. Of the nineteen days with significant jellyfish strandings, there were nine days (forty-seven point four percent) that occurred when the tidal range was less than five meters although only eighteen days (thirty-one percent) of all days during the same period had tidal ranges less than five meters. This association was not significant (P equals zero point zero six one, x squared statistic equals three point five two two, one degree of freedom). However, tide range less than five meters that occurred one and two days prior to the stranding days were both significantly associated with stranding events (P equals zero point zero one three, x squared statistic equals six point one five eight, one degree of freedom for both one and two day lags). This result indicates that strandings were significantly more likely to follow days of small tidal range than those of larger tidal ranges. However, as shown in Fig. four, not all stranding events occurred on days which followed smaller than average tide ranges.

Water temperature increased from twenty point five to twenty-eight point five degrees Celsius over the two-month period from early August until late October. The most significant change was during September water temperatures of Cable Beach increasing from twenty-four degrees Celsius to twenty-seven degrees Celsius between twenty-eight August and twenty-nine September. Chlorophyll-a levels of Cable Beach were low (zero point four to zero point five milligrams per cubic meter) from four August to four September and then increased to one point three to one point five milligrams per cubic meter as chlorophyll-a levels increased first in Roebuck Bay and south and north to Cable Beach and beyond. Winds were easterly on average from four to nineteen August before shifting south-westerly to westerly between twenty August and four September. Winds were again easterly from four to twelve September before shifting westerly to south-westerly between thirteen September and six October. From seven October, winds were variable but predominantly southerly and south-westerly before turning westerly again from fifteen to twenty-two October. From twenty-three to thirty October, winds were again variable from the south and west. Among the thirty-five days that satellite wind data were available during the fifty-eight-day period analysed (twenty-four August to twenty October), seven of eleven (sixty-three point six percent) of strandings occurred when winds were blowing onshore (north-west through to southwest). However, the direction of the wind (all four quadrants compared) was not significantly associated with jellyfish strandings on the days they occurred P equals zero point four three two, chi-squared statistic equals two point seven five one, three degrees of freedom. Neither was it significantly associated with wind direction one or two days prior to strandings P equals zero point nine two one, chi-squared statistic equals zero point four nine one, three degrees of freedom and P equals zero point four one three, chi-squared statistic equals two point eight six seven, three degrees of freedom respectively despite ninety point nine percent of strandings occurring when winds were blowing onshore (north-west through to south-west) with a two-day time lag. It is likely that the small sample size which was affected by the absence of wind data from twenty-three of the days during the period of observation during which time there were eight stranding events. During the fifty-eight days, twelve of nineteen (sixty-three point two percent) of strandings occurred when currents flowed onshore. However, current direction (all four quadrants compared) was not significantly associated with jellyfish strandings on the days they occurred P equals zero point eight six three, chi-squared statistic equals zero point seven four one, three degrees of freedom or one or two days prior to strandings P equals zero point two nine zero, chi-squared statistic equals three point seven four eight, three degrees of freedom and P equals zero point five zero one, chi-squared statistic equals two point three six three, three degrees of freedom respectively. Logistic regression analysis reinforced the importance of tide range as a predictor of strandings. The strongest individual predictor was tide range two days before strandings P equals zero point zero zero nine, see Table one, and the next best was current direction, also with a two-day lag. Wind direction was a worse predictor than either tide or current. The best logistic regression model which combined the two predictors of tide range (two-day lag) and wind speed (two-day lag) provided only slight improvement in the fit over tide range alone according to Aikaike's Information Criteria (AIC) (Table one). The Bayesian Information Criteria (Shwartz's BIC) did not show any improvement in the model fit when tide range and wind speed were combined (Table one).

This difference in model selection is easily explained by the way that Shwartz's BIC penalises attempts to improve model fit simply by an exhaustive exercise of adding more parameters and in analyses with small sample sizes such as ours. For this reason, Shwartz's BIC is favoured by some statisticians. Nevertheless, the improvement gained by the inclusion of current direction P equals zero point zero one eight or wind speed with tide range in the model P equals zero point zero zero eight was slight, and the difference in wind speed between jellyfish stranding days (with a two day lag) and other days was negligible (means of eleven point seven kilometers per hour, standard deviation equals three point six and twelve point eight kilometers per hour, standard deviation equals three point two, respectively). Both the univariate and multivariate approaches reinforced the importance of tide range as an important predictor of strandings. Neither of the two approaches found wind or current direction as a significant predictor of strandings.


## Size frequency and individual biomass

Diameter of C mastigophora collected offshore of Gantheaume Point on nineteenth September ranged from three point five to eighteen point zero centimeters in diameter with size frequency greatest at five point zero to five point nine centimeters and eleven point zero to eleven point nine centimeters. Individuals between ten point zero and twelve point nine centimeters made up thirty-four point six percent of the population and those less than six point zero centimeters made up seventeen point zero percent. Diameter of jellyfish collected from Cable Beach on fifth October ranged from four point three to twenty-one point five centimeters in diameter with a peak in abundance at ten point zero to ten point nine centimeters. This sample had fewer small jellyfish, seven point five percent less than six point zero centimeters, but there was no significant difference in mean size of medusa collected on nineteenth September and fifth October between the two samples, nine point nine centimeters standard deviation equals three point five and ten point one centimeters standard deviation equals three point zero respectively, Mann-Whitney U test, U equals fourteen thousand seventy-six, P equals zero point four four two. Despite having equal variances F test: F left parentheses one hundred fifty-eight comma one hundred eighty-five right parentheses equals one point two nine eight, P equals zero point zero eight seven right parentheses, the samples were non-normally distributed, Shapiro-Wilk test, W equals zero point nine seven nine, P equals zero point zero one five and W equals zero point nine eight three, P equals zero point zero two five respectively, and could not be satisfactorily transformed, so the non-parametric test was applied instead of a t test. Biomass of C mastigophora collected offshore of Gantheaume Point increased exponentially with diameter, as estimated from the equation W equals zero point two six six five times D raised to the power two point eight nine four three where W is whole wet weight in grams and D is bell diameter in centimeters. The linear regression of log base ten W against D was highly significant with R squared equals zero point eight four four, P less than zero point zero zero zero one. In the population, sampled individuals greater than or equal to thirteen centimeters made up forty-six point six percent of the biomass but only seventeen point six percent of the abundance. The mean water content of the jellyfish after drying was ninety-five point eight percent standard error equals one point two five, and after ashing, the mean percentage of dry weight that was found to be organic matter was thirty-four point zero percent standard error equals one point two six. The mean organic carbon and total nitrogen content of the dried tissue were seven point five percent standard error equals zero point four, and two point zero percent standard error equals zero point one, respectively. The tissue of the jellyfish had carbon delta thirteen C and nitrogen delta fifteen N isotopic signatures of negative twenty point seven nine standard error equals zero point zero six, and eight point one four delta fifteen N standard error equals zero point zero eight, respectively. Mean C to N ratio was three point nine

Plus or minus zero point zero two standard error, N equals twenty-one. Abundance and biomass of C. mastigophora stranded on Cable Beach

The average wet weight of one hundred sixty-eight C. mastigophora washed ashore on Cable Beach on five October twenty twelve (as predicted from mean bell diameter) was two hundred sixty-eight point four grams. The mean density (ind. per square meter plus or minus one standard error) of C. mastigophora washed ashore on Cable Beach on eight October twenty twelve was two point six five plus or minus zero point six four (range zero point six to five point four) for the six high-water transects and one point seven four plus or minus zero point five eight (range zero point five to three point nine) for the six low-water transects. The average was two point two zero plus or minus zero point four three ind. per square meter for all twelve transects along the whole beach. This was used as an estimate of density for the whole beach and corresponded to a wet weight of five hundred ninety point six plus or minus one hundred fifteen point four grams per square meter. Using a conservative estimate of beach width of one hundred meters (measured average was one hundred fifteen point five meters, see Materials and Methods section) along the


## Hydrobiologia

two point five kilometers of beach where the density data were collected, means that the area of beach surveyed was two hundred fifty thousand square meters. Accordingly it can be calculated that along this stretch of beach, one hundred forty-seven point six plus or minus twenty-eight point nine tonnes of jellyfish was deposited by the tide. This is equivalent to fifty-nine point zero plus or minus eleven point five tonnes per linear kilometer of beach. The survey by vehicle of the extent of the swarm south and north of Cable Beach revealed that the jellyfish were washed up in similar numbers between Gantheaume Point and Coconut Wells, a distance of fifteen kilometers. If the density and size distribution of C. mastigophora along this section of coastline were similar to that measured on Cable Beach as suggested by the photographic record obtained in our survey, then this would equate to a biomass of eight hundred eighty-six plus or minus one hundred seventy-three tonnes (three point thirty million plus or minus zero point sixty-four million jellyfish) being deposited along the coast on eight October twenty twelve. Strandings of similar scale were observed on a total of sixteen days between twelve September and seventeen October twenty twelve meaning a total of fifty-two point eight million plus or minus ten point three million (fourteen thousand one hundred seventy-two plus or minus two thousand seven hundred seventy tonnes) jellyfish may have washed ashore during this time. The estimate is conservative given on each of these sixteen days that there were two tidal cycles each depositing jellyfish on the beach and there were smaller (but significant) numbers washed up on each of the other fifty-seven days between twelve August and twenty-three October.


## Diet and commensal organisms

The prey items recovered from the tentacles of fourteen C. mastigophora are shown in Fig. eight. On average, two hundred twenty organisms were recovered from tentacles (plus or minus sixty-eight SE). The taxonomic composition included small copepods, copepod fragments and other crustaceans, bivalves, invertebrate eggs, phytoplankton and microzooplank- ton. All medusae had invertebrate eggs, and the majority had bivalves, pteropods, amphipods and copepods. Proportionately bivalves,

pteropods and invertebrate eggs dominated the prey captured. There was no difference in organisms found in tentacles of medusae collected from Dampier Creek or Gantheaume Point (Permanova Pseudo-F seven nine, P equals zero point six). Two jellyfish from Gantheaume Point harboured small two centimeters carangid fishes as associate or commensal organisms.


## Discussion

Distribution and occurrence of swarms

This study found that significant jellyfish stranding events were associated with smaller than average tide range, with a time lag of two days. Using the same time lag, more than ninety percent of all strandings occurred when winds were blowing onshore, but this result was not statistically significant. Modelled currents flowing onshore were associated with sixty-three to sixty-eight percent of strandings depending on the time lag used. Combining these three factors in a logistic regression model failed to provide a better prediction of stranding events than tide range on its own. The influence of tide alone on meso-scale physical processes affecting jellyfish distribution would explain why days with significant beach strandings were interspersed with days of absent or minimal stranding. However, we expect that some combination of influence of wind or currents acting to bring the jellyfish close to the shore and the small tides preventing significant advection away from the beach is taking place. Tides, winds and currents are known to influence distribution of jellyfish and cause them to concentrate or "swarm" near to the shore. The time lags account for the period between when physical processes are enacted and when their consequences (jellyfish on beach) are observed. The use of time lags in wind data has previously been shown to be important in predicting jellyfish distribution in Physalia (which have "sails"). Our study shows that the use of time lags in tide range may be a useful predictor of rhizostome jellyfish distribution, at least, in areas where large tide ranges exist, such as in the north-west of Australia. Tidal influence has been shown to be the dominant onshore-offshore current transport mechanism in this region.

et al., two thousand six. The element of predictability of jellyfish strandings may provide beach management authorities to plan for and manage beach use and swimming activity when jellyfish swarms are brought close to shore by tides and onshore winds. This has previously been emphasised by Gershwin et al., two thousand fourteen who show how changes in wind patterns can be responsible for onshore transport of cubozoan jellyfish and can be used to predict when irukandji jellyfish stings are most likely to occur. Although our results show tide as a significant predictor of strandings, our results did not reveal wind or modelled current direction as significant predictors. It is possible that for the chi-squared analyses which relied on wind measurements from satellite made out to sea, we had an insufficient sample size to find an effect because the satellite did not provide any data during twenty-three of the fifty-eight days over which the strandings occurred. For the logistic regression, we used wind measurements taken at a weather station on land to avoid missing values; however, these data are less relevant to where the jellyfish are located offshore before stranding, and thus, those winds will have less influence on the onshore transport of jellyfish. It is possible that direct measurements of wind and current related to jellyfish occurrence would yield better results than the satellite wind and modelled current data used here. Thus for the purposes of prediction and to be routinely applied, a method of more reliably obtaining current speed and direction and wind direction, from out over the ocean, west of the beach where the jellyfish are swarming, needs to be found. This could be in the form of moored weather stations and current meters. Another factor that could be important in confounding attempts to match stranding events to environmental conditions is that some scyphozoan jellyfish have been shown to exhibit swimming behaviour including prey searching and diel vertical migrations which will influence the extent to which ocean conditions and currents will influence onshore directional movement of jellyfish. Moreover, recent novel research using jellyfish tagged with accelerometers has shown how jellyfish can actively orient themselves to swim with or against a tidal current and that this behaviour can act to both maintain swarms and avoid beach strandings.

The observations of Marsh and Slack-Smith two thousand ten and those from our study suggest that C. mastigophora can be seasonally abundant in tropical north-western Australia. However, the observed strandings may represent a small fraction of those that have occurred due to the remoteness and sparse human population in this region. The areas where it has been observed to be washed up in large numbers are popular tourist areas and strandings in more remote areas are unlikely to be recorded, especially given our observations of rapid disintegration of stranded jellyfish and their subsequent removal by large tidal ranges in the region. Any link between interannual variability in the timing and scale of observed swarms in relation to ocean climate variability is not evident. The swarm in two thousand twelve coincided with an increase in both water temperature and chlorophyll-a, but it is not possible to say the swarm event is related to either as these are likely to be seasonal events. The large swarms in Broome in the latter months of two thousand six and two thousand twelve were during or at the end of El Niño conditions; however, other large swarms observed further south in April two thousand and two thousand thirteen were during La Niña conditions; the swarm in April two thousand seven was during neutral or slight El Niño conditions and the two thousand ten swarm was neutral but right on the transition between the strong two thousand nine El Niño and two thousand ten La Niña conditions.


## Economic and ecological significance of C. mastigophora swarms

Large swarms, especially those that occur over protracted periods such as was the two thousand twelve swarm, result in numerous stings on swimming beaches and also deter swimmers from beaches and from areas where tourism is of great economic importance. Other significant impacts of the swarms have included blocking the water cooling intakes of the power station in Karratha in nineteen seventy-six.

C. mastigophora is an edible jellyfish species, and a fishery has been established in Indonesia based on export to Japan. To avoid confusion, it is worth noting here, that Rumpet nineteen ninety-one provides an excellent description of another sea-east Asian fishery for "red" jellyfish, but it is unlikely that this is C. mastigophora. Rumpet's nineteen ninety-one report from the South China Sea almost certainly refers to Rhopilema esculentum Kishinouye eighteen ninety-one based on the description of fisheries for this species and Rhopilema hispidum Vanhöffen eighteen eighty-eight elsewhere in the South China Sea.

et al., two thousand eight. The economic feasibility of a fishery for C. mastigophora has not been evaluated in Australia and maybe worthy of examination especially if swarms continue to have detrimental economic impacts.

Bivalve larvae, pteropods and invertebrate eggs dominated the prey items we found on C. mastigophora arms and twenty-six percent of all observed prey items were bivalve larvae. Nothing is known of the feeding rates of C. mastigophora; however, at the population sizes we recorded the potential for them to deplete plankton from the water column must be considered. Some jellyfish species feed predominantly and selectively on bivalve mollusc larvae including other rhizostome jellyfish. For example, Larson found very high feeding rates by Stomolophus meleagris Agassiz eighteen sixty-two on oyster larvae which made up fifty-six percent of prey items and Ballard and Myers found bivalve larvae made up more than eighty percent of the diet of Proboscidactyla stellata Forbes eighteen forty-six. In the southern Kimberley region where we observed significant swarms in two thousand six, two thousand ten, two thousand eleven, and two thousand twelve, the silver lipped pearl oyster Pinctada maxima Jameson nineteen zero one forms the basis of Australia's pearl industry valued at one hundred twenty million Australian dollars per year. P. maxima spawn in the spring beginning in September when the peak spawning occurs although the spawning season can extend through to April. The peak spawning period coincides with the same period that C. mastigophora swarms have occurred near Broome and Eighty Mile Beach which is the most important area for pearl oyster broodstock in north-western Australia, meaning that when they are dense, C. mastigophora might be a significant predator of pearl oyster larvae. Condie et al. showed how tidal currents dominate pearl oyster larval transport in the Eighty Mile Beach region meaning larvae are retained in the area. This would make them vulnerable to large swarms of C. mastigophora which would be subject to the same transport patterns. Larson measured the feeding rate of the closely related S. meleagris and found a three hundred twenty-five gram jellyfish would consume six thousand prey items per day over half of which were oyster larvae. Based on these feeding rates, the population numbers of C. mastigophora estimated in this study greater than fifty times ten to the sixth power million, one point four times ten to the fourth power tonnes could consume upwards of three times ten to the eleventh power oyster larvae per day. It is important that a more in-depth study of the diet and feeding rate of C. mastigophora be undertaken to determine its significance as a predator of P. maxima and other bivalve larvae as our data on diet represent just a snapshot in time.

Studies on the planktonic system are also required to determine the relative abundance of oyster larvae and other plankton in the water column as well as in the diet of C. mastigophora. The low C:N ratio three point nine to one and eight C thirteen (negative twenty point eight) of C. mastigophora tissue indicate a dependence on marine derived sources of carbon in its diet. The C:N ratio is similar to that found in other jellyfish: four point zero to one and three point one to one to four to two to one. The eight C thirteen (negative twenty point eight) and eight N fifteen (eight point one) isotopic signatures of C. mastigophora are similar to that recorded for another catostylid jellyfish Catostylus mosaicus, eight C thirteen equals negative twenty point nine to negative twenty-two point two and a rhizostome jellyfish eight C thirteen equals negative twenty-two point zero to negative seventeen point four, eight N fifteen equals four point eight to ten point six but lower than in Pelagia noctiluca, eight C thirteen equals negative eighteen point eight. Pitt et al. found that copepods and mysids were the most important components of the diet of C. mosaicus based on comparative analysis of jellyfish and prey item stable isotope values. The use of stable isotopes can be used to infer the importance of particular food sources integrated over time as opposed to a snapshot in time in the case of prey items sampled from jellyfish arms. However, we can conclude little about the importance of different components of the diet of C. mastigophora over the longer term given we lack stable isotope data for the prey items we found and the difficulties interpreting diet from jellyfish tissue isotopic signatures without adequate temporal, spatial, ontogenetic and between organ sampling.

C mastigophora have a water content on ninety-five point eight percent which is almost identical to other species studied. Dead jellyfish decay quickly, two to three days, on tropical beaches, meaning that the organic carbon and nitrogen in their bodies indirectly derived from primary and secondary production offshore are made available in the nearshore coastal zone. Using our measurements of density of jellyfish in strandings, frequency of strandings and biomass of jellyfish, it can be calculated that this contribution was of the order of forty-four tonnes of carbon and eleven tonnes of nitrogen in twenty twelve. However, although we were able to provide some data on the biomass of stranded jellyfish that this is only a reflection of the total biomass as we do not know what percentage of the population is stranded at any one time. Other jellyfish species which undergo swarms have been shown to be important in delivering significant quantities of organic matter into coastal food webs.

Kramp, nineteen sixty-one, records C mastigophora as reaching four hundred millimeters in diameter, but our specimens were almost all less than half this size. There is no information on growth rates of C mastigophora, and it is not known if C mastigophora in Australian waters grow to the size stated by Kramp, nineteen sixty-one, whose records drew on studies in Malaysia. Extensive further study of the biology, especially growth and feeding and swarm size, along with better resolution of spatial and temporal occurrence of C mastigophora is needed to evaluate the ecological and socioeconomic significance of this phenomenon and whether the frequency or intensity of swarms has changed recently.