## lfp7-2024-09-03_20_15_25-select.pdf

Selectivity for Alkynyl or Allenyl Imidamides and Imidates in Copper-Catalyzed Reactions of Terminal one, three-Diynes and Azides

ACCESS

Allenes constitute a distinct class of organic compounds with two orthogonal pi-bonds. There are numerous natural products and bioactive molecules that contain allene substructures. It has been demonstrated that allene-substituted bioactive compounds, like steroids, prostaglandins, carbacyclins, nucleosides, and unnatural amino acids, display higher potency, increased metabolic stability, and bioavailability. Because of the strained nature of the cumulene structure, allenes have been engaged in numerous synthetic transformations as a versatile building block to form a variety of carbo- and heterocyclic frameworks. Axial-to-central chirality transfer is an efficient method for generating chiral compounds containing one or more stereogenic centers from chiral allenes.

Due to the important utility of allenes, it is highly desirable to develop new synthetic methods to generate functionalized allenes from readily available starting materials. One of the traditional approaches to the synthesis of allenes involves one, two-elimination of vinyl derivatives under strong basic or metal-catalyzed conditions. SNtwo'-type reactions with propargylic alcohol derivatives also constitute an efficient method for generating allenes. Transition metal-catalyzed coupling between terminal alkynes and carbonyl moieties in the presence of a secondary amine is also a well-established method, and a copper one-catalyzed cross-coupling of terminal alkynes with diazo compounds is another efficient protocol for generating allenes. Trisubstituted allenes can be accessed via metal- catalyzed cationic Heck coupling of alkynes with aryl halide/triflate. Enones and ynones are also explored as a precursor of allenes.

In two thousand four, Fu reported a copper one-catalyzed coupling of alkynes and diazoacetate under mild conditions to generate three-alkynyl carboxylate and only small amounts of the corresponding allenoates were observed. On the contrary, Lee and others found that the alkynes containing a heteroatom substituent at the propargylic or homopropargylic carbon center preferentially generate the allenoate, and in particular in the presence of a base such as triethyl amine, allenoate became the exclusive product. Fox also reported a similar reaction that selectively generated allenoate as the product. Although the exact mechanisms of these reactions are not well understood, on the basis of other related reactions, we propose a copper acetylide-mediated mechanism for the formation of the three-alkynoate and allenoate. Relying on this copper acetylide- mediated mechanism, we envision that the copper-catalyzed coupling of terminal one, three-diyne one and azide would generate three-alkynyl and allenyl imidamide/imidate two or three. We surmise that the terminal one, three-diyne would form the corresponding copper acetylide, which will participate in a three plus two cycloaddition with tosylazide to form triazole IN-one. The subsequent loss of molecular nitrogen will lead to two equilibrating organocopper aza-cummulenes IN-two and IN-three, which then react with a nucleophile such as an amine or alcohol to generate imidamide or imidate containing either an alkyne or an allene moiety. A unique feature of this transformation is the selective transformation of the terminal alkyne moiety for the construction of imidamide and imidate functionality. Although starting from a different set of starting materials, the formation of closely related products from transformations in A and B is noteworthy. Herein, we describe our exploration of copper-catalyzed reactions of terminal one, three-diyne one with tosylazide, which generated functionalized one, three-disubstituted two, three-dienyl imidamides and imidates three with good selectivity over the corresponding alkyne derivative two. Also, it was found that the types of nucleophiles, the base additives, and the substituent patterns of the one, three-diynes not only affect the ratio of two to three but also promote the formation of alternative products such as three cumulenes and triple-bond-migrated products.

Our exploration commenced with the assessment of the efficiency and selectivity for the formation of three-alkynyl and allenyl imidamide two and three. Under the conditions that include a copper catalyst at ten mole percent, an azide at one point two equivalents, and an amine at one point two equivalents, one, three-diynes containing different substituents were examined. A hexyl-substituted terminal one, three-diyne one a and TsN three provided a mixture of three-alkynyl and allenyl imidamides two aa and three aa in seventy-five percent yield with a two to one ratio. Reactions of one a with other azides such as diphenyl phosphoryl azide and mesyl azide are also efficient, affording three-alkynyl imidamide two ab and two ac as the major products. On the contrary, employing piperidine as a nucleophile under otherwise identical conditions, one a provided two ad exclusively. One, three-diynes with a secondary or tertiary alkyl group provided good yields of two or three ba and two or three ca but low selectivity with a slight preference for alkynyl products two ba and two ca. One-cyclohexenyl-substituted one, three-diyne provided two or three da in forty-eight percent yield with a preference for compound three da. One, three-diyne one e containing a propargylic hydroxyl group afforded allene derivative three ea predominantly, whereas one, three-diyne one f containing a trimethylsilyl group provided alkyne derivative two fa selectively but in marginal yield.

Once a general trend for the efficiency and selectivity between two and three had been revealed from the entries in Table one, we next explored the selective formation of three-alkynyl imidamide two. As piperidine exclusively generated

Three-alkynyl imidamide, reactions of n-decyl- and homobenzyl-substituted one, three-diynes with piperidine were performed, resulting in the corresponding three-alkynyl imidamides Two A C prime and Two A C prime prime in fifty-seven percent and forty percent yields, respectively. Reaction with phosphoryl azide and alkyl-substituted diynes predominantly generated three-alkynyl imidamides Two A B prime, Two A B prime prime, and Two B B in moderate forty-five to sixty percent yields. Electron-rich one, three-diynes with silyl substituents selectively delivered three-alkynyl imidamides. T E S, T I P S, and T B S-substituted one, three-diynes provided the corresponding alkynyl derivatives Two F A prime to Two F A prime prime prime in eighty-five to ninety-four percent yields. Reactions of T I P S-substituted one, three-diyne with phosphoryl and mesyl azide also generated three-alkynyl imides Two F B prime prime and Two F C prime prime exclusively in fifty-nine percent and eighty-two percent yields, respectively. It is evident from Scheme Two that reactions with cyclic amine, phosphoryl azide, and electron-rich silyl-substituted one, three-diynes tend to generate three-alkynyl imidamide predominantly or exclusively.

Next, we examined reactions of different one, three-diynes to selectively form two, three-dienyl imidamide Three (Scheme Three). On the basis of the initial observation with propargylic alcohol-containing diyne One E that selectively generated two, three-dienyl imidamide, we further tested the reactivity of structurally diversified propargyl alcohols, (thio)ethers, amines, and amides. One, three-diynes containing secondary or tertiary alcohols afforded two, three-dienyl imidamides Three G A, Three G A, Three G A prime prime, Three G A prime prime prime, Three J A, Three I A prime, Three I A prime prime, and Three K A as a predominant or exclusive product in sixty-five to seventy-six percent yields. The selectivity between the allenyl and alkynyl isomer depends on the substituent, but no clear trend has been found. One, three-diynes with a tertiary alcohol and a cycloalkyl substituent delivered two, three-dienyl imidamides Three L A, Three L A prime, and Three L A prime prime in seventy to eighty percent yields with a roughly ten to one selectivity. Carvone-containing one, three-diyne afforded allene Three M A (seven to one allene:alkyne ratio) in sixty-nine percent yield with a one point four to one diastereomeric ratio. While a vinyl-conjugated one, three-diyne containing a free hydroxyl group provided allene Three N A in forty-six percent yield with a low selectivity (four to one), one, three-diynes with benzyl-, three-MeO-Ph-, and T H P-protected primary alcohols exclusively generated allene derivatives (Three O A, Three O A prime, and Three O A prime prime, respectively) in fifty-four to seventy percent yields. Similarly, a cholesteryl ether-substituted one, three-diyne generated allene Three P A in fifty-six percent yield with an eight to one allene:alkyne ratio. On the contrary, the corresponding thioether afforded Three Q A contaminated with the alkyne isomer (seven point five to one allene:alkyne). One, three-diynes containing aniline and tosylamido substituents at the propargylic position selectively generated allenes Three R A and Three S A in fifty-eight percent and eighty-eight percent yields, respectively. A gem-dimethyl, however, decreased the yield and selectivity for Three S A prime (sixty-eight percent, eight point five to one). An indole-substituted one, three-diyne provided only allene Three T A in sixty-eight percent yield, and N-allyl tosyl-substituted one, three-diyne provided single isomer Three U A in sixty-seven percent yield. On the contrary, phenyl- and four-MeO-phenyl-substituted one, three-diynes provided moderate yields and selectivity provided allenes Three V A (sixty-four percent, four point six to one) and Three V A prime (sixty-four percent, three point six to one).

Although the selectivity of forming allenyl imidamides is good, the formation of alkyne isomer could not be suppressed in many cases. At this juncture, we surmised that trapping the ketenimine intermediate with alcohols may have different product distributions. Indeed, under identical conditions except for the replacement of I-P-R-two-N-H (one point two equivalent) with MeOH (ten equivalent) and E-t-three-N (two equivalent), the reaction of one, three-diynes selectively provided two, three-dienyl imidates without a vestige of the alkyne isomer. The lower stoichiometry of methanol led to the lower efficiency of the reaction. Alkyl and alkenyl diynes, which provided a mixture of allenyl and alkynyl imidamides previously, selectively generated allenyl imidates (three-a-e, three-c-e, and three-d-e) in moderate to good yield (entries one to three, respectively). Even though one, three-diyne one-g containing a free secondary alcohol led to decomposition (entry four), the corresponding benzyl- and tert-butyldimethylsilyl-protected provided two, three-dienyl imidates (three-h-e, three-h-e prime, and three-h-e double prime, respectively) in good yield (entries five to seven, respectively). Similarly, one, three-diyne with benzyl-protected secondary alcohol one-i delivered two, three-dienyl imidate three-i-e in seventy-two percent yield.

Subsequently, we observed that under standard conditions, one, three-diynes four containing an acetoxy or benzoyloxy substituent at the propargylic position provided mono-, di-, and trisubstituted three-cumulenes. For example, one, three-diynes four-a to four-c afforded trisubstituted cumulenes five-a to five-c, respectively, in seventy-six to eighty percent yields (entries one to three, respectively). One, three-diynes substituted with a cycloalkyl moiety afforded the corresponding cumulenes five-d to five-f in good yields (entries four to six, respectively). Unexpectedly, while the acetate derivative of tertiary alcohol was afforded, the corresponding primary and secondary acetates provide a mixture of the expected three-cumulenes and the corresponding acetoxy allene derivatives. However, upon replacement of the acetate with para-nitrobenzoate (four-g to four-i), only cumulenes five-g to five-i were obtained (entries seven to nine, respectively). We believe this is the consequence of the better leaving group capacity of a benzoate compared to that of an acetate. Three-cumulenes make up a special class of polyene organic compounds whose synthetic utilities have been little explored. Thus, the current mild protocol to allow the preparation of three-cumulenes containing various substituent patterns from readily available building blocks is of highly synthetically useful.

We envision that with a suitably tethered nucleophile, the conversion of one, three-diynes to the corresponding conjugated allenyl imidamide and imidates would promote an intramolecular Michael-type addition. Under standard conditions, homopropargyl alcohol-containing one, three-diynes six-a and six-b were smoothly converted to tetrahydrofuran-ylidene imidates seven-a and seven-b in forty-eight and eighty-seven percent yields, respectively (entries one and two, respectively). The corresponding homopropargyl sulfonamide six-c led to one-tosylpyrrolidinylidene imidamide seven-c in seventy-two percent yield (entry three); however, the formation of a six-membered ring seven-d from six-d failed (entry four). One, three-diynes six-e and six-f substituted with a phenyl group containing an ortho-hydroxyl or N-H-two participated in the cascade reaction to generate benzofuranyl imidamide seven-e in seventy percent yield and indolyl imidamide seven-f in sixty-four percent yield (entries five and six, respectively).

Although expected, migration of the triple bond from three-alkynyl or two, three-dienyl isomers to the corresponding two-alkynyl isomer eight was not observed under the conditions regardless of the reaction time. However, because of the thermodynamic preference for two-alkynyl isomers, we surmised that the isomerization of two or three to eight would happen if a base stronger than secondary amines is used. Indeed, treating a mixture of two and three with D-B-U (zero point one equivalent) rapidly induced isomerization to provide two-alkynyl imidamides eight-a to eight-d. On the contrary, phenyl- and silyl-substituted three-alkynyl imidamides two and three did not isomerize to the corresponding two-alkynyl isomers eight-e and eight-f, respectively.

In conclusion, we have developed efficient protocols to generate discrete isomers of two-alkynyl, three-alkynyl, two, three-dienyl, and two, three, four-trienyl imidamides and imidates from copper-catalyzed reactions of one, three-diynes and tosylazide. The selectivity between three-alkynyl and two, three-dienyl imidamides could be controlled by a heteroatom substituent at the propargylic position of the one, three-diynes and employing different trapping reagents such as amines and alcohols. Three-cumulene derivatives were also generated by employing one, three-diynes that contain an acetoxy or benzoyloxy substituent at the propargylic position. While trapping of the putative azacumulene intermediates with amines provided either three-alkynyl or two, three-dienyl imidamides depending on the structure of the trapping amines, trapping with methanol selectively generated two, three-dienyl imidates. It was found that both three-alkynyl and two, three-dienyl imidamides could be isomerized to selectively generate the corresponding two-alkynyl isomers under equilibrating conditions with a stronger base such as D-B-U. Intramolecular trapping of the putative azacumulene intermediates provided five-membered heterocyclic products if the one, three-diyne substrates contained a homopropargylic hydroxyl or amino substituent. A unique feature of these unprecedented reactions is that under mild reaction conditions, terminal one, three-diynes could be selectively converted to different unsaturated carboxylic acid derivatives with good selectivity.


## ASSOCIATED CONTENT

Supporting Information

Experimental procedures and spectroscopic data for all new compounds.


## Corresponding Author

Notes

The authors declare no competing financial interest.