## 'Brothers at Peace': People-to-People Reconciliation in the Ethiopian-Eritrean Borderlands 'Brothers at Peace': People-to-People Reconciliation in the Ethiopian-Eritrean Borderlands

The coming to power of Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed in Ethiopia in twenty eighteen opened up a renewed peace engagement with Eritrea and diplomatic rela- tions were restored. Before the political rapprochement, grassroots proc- esses of people-to-people reconciliation in the borderlands between the two countries had been underway for years, gradually eroding officially- produced enemy stereotypes. This article explores how physical borders and boundaries of identity at a local level may be conceived differently from that at state borders or expressions of formal nationalism at an inter-state level. The local level border between the northern regional state of Tigray in Ethiopia and Eritrea has become increasingly porous over the last years, whilst the inter-state border was rigidly defended. The political rapprochement is however disconnected from the people-to-people recon- ciliation, as the local government in Tigray is at odds with both Ethiopia's federal government in Addis Ababa and the Eritrean government. The formalised peace processes are elite driven, leaving no voice for the peo- ple affected in the borderlands.


## Introduction

'Finally, we are once again united, as brothers should be', declared an elderly per- son on the streets of Mekelle, the capital of the northern region of Tigray in Ethiopia. The nineteen ninety-eight to two thousand Eritrean-Ethiopian war had pitted brothers against brothers, in a social, cultural, and political sense, and dismembered families and kin- folk. After the peace rapprochement and the opening of the Eritrean-Ethiopian bor- der in mid-September twenty eighteen, Mekelle was flooded with Eritreans who for the first time in twenty years were free to cross the heavily militarised border to Ethiopia. Tales of reunions of long lost family members and relatives spread like wildfire, and cross-border trade and business were booming. Peace rapprochement and the border opening seemed too good to be true, however, so people from both sides of the bor- der hastily visited each other to reconnect, in case the tides of peace turned.

Since the nineteen ninety-eight to two thousand war, Eritrea and Ethiopia had been locked in a 'no war, no peace' impasse. This ceased in June twenty eighteen, when Eritrea's President Isaias Afwerki agreed to enter into dialogue after a peace offer by Ethiopia's new Prime Minister, Abiy Ahmed. 'Our desire is to love rather than hate', stated Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed. 'What we miss is to hug our brothers in Asmara. If we are in love then the other things are minor. And if we do that, we might not need a border'. Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed's emphasis on 'peace and love' in his new international rela- tions policies led to the coining of the term 'hug-and-love' diplomacy. For his 'decisive initiative to resolve the border conflict with neighbouring Eritrea' he was awarded the twenty nineteen Nobel Peace Prize.

In July twenty eighteen, Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed visited the Eritrean capital of Asmara. He was the first Ethiopian Prime Minister to do so in over twenty years. He was received by an ecstatic Eritrean crowd waving Ethiopian flags. On the occasion, Yemane Gebremeskel, Eritrea's Minister of Information and a key advisor to President Isaias Afwerki, tweeted: 'A truly historic moment with memorable water- shed events: brotherly embrace of the leaders'. The visit was soon reciprocated by President Isaias Afwerki who travelled to Addis Ababa to sign a five-point declar- ation of peace and friendship between the two countries. The agreement led to res- toration of diplomatic relations and opened up communications between the two states and peoples. During the visit, President Isaias Afwerki declared: 'Words can- not express the joy we are feeling now. We are one people. Whoever forgets that does not understand our situation'.

Although the two leaders declared that the border between their two countries was redundant and that they were actually 'one people', those straddling the con- tested border were not immediately reassured about their leaders' genuine intentions and interests for peace. Wars and conflicts have ravaged the Eritrean-Ethiopian highlands throughout centuries, infusing ethnic boundaries and territorial borders with various sentiments of identity and expressions of power.

Territorial boundaries and manifestations of economic, cultural, and political realms are perceived differently according to context. For instance, the Eritrean-Ethiopian highlands with its ancient indigenous plough-based agricultural system has throughout history placed great emphasis on the control of land and hence on the demarcation of land between that which is controlled by one person, kin group, or village, and that controlled by another. Frequent border disputes over agricultural land between neighbours, kinsmen, lineages, and villages have been common for centuries, and these have infused the twin concepts of physical border and identity boundary with concrete and metaphorical significance. The lowland pastoralist communities of the Horn of Africa, on the other hand, tend to approach the concepts of border/boundaries in a different manner. Although territorial units are broadly defined, there are no clear-cut borders demarcating one person's or group's land from that of a neighbouring person or group. There are overlapping zones of interest, with porous borders.

The highlanders' rigid understanding of borders is also connected to layers - or scales - of identity (family - kin - neighbouring community - ethnic group - nation), successively embracing larger units of territory. Territorial identity formations were ascribed a socio-political hierarchy, where 'orders from above' were to be executed without question. This was of particular importance in feuds and conflicts over ter- ritorial domains, where latent identity categories have been exploited by elites to rally the masses behind their political project, be that for domination at local level or hege- monic control at the centre. Which layer of identity or identity alliance that was made relevant, depended upon the territorial unit, or border, that was contested. When I was doing research in Tigray after the outbreak of the nineteen ninety-eight two thousand war, an elderly Tigrayan farmer eloquently explained this context to me:

When the Eritreans attacked us, we did not know what to believe. We used to think of them as our brothers - we have bonds of marriage, trade, and friendship that link us together. We were also fighting together as one against the military junta. Now, suddenly they have become our mortal enemies; and our old foes, the Amhara, are coming to our rescue! But, although we are fighting the Eritreans today with the help of the Amhara, this may change again tomorrow; as different kings [governments] come and go, so also will our enemies and friends change.

Similar sentiments were also heard among the Eritrean border population and frontline soldiers during the war. As expressed by an Eritrean soldier witnessing the carnage of Ethiopian brethren at the Tsorona frontline in nineteen ninety-nine: 'This is so sad. These are our brothers and now we fight them here. We are really one people'.

The mass killings and destructions carried out during the nineteen ninety-eight to two thousand war created deep-rooted animosity between the two peoples, which also affected and reconfig- ured borderland identities, at least temporarily. Moreover, the political impasse and twenty year 'no war, no peace' situation has furthered an identity schism between the borderland peoples. Are the wounds created by the nineteen ninety-eight to two thousand war still affect- ing relations in the borderlands? Or has time, cultural, and religious commonality and joint socio-economic grievances healed the wounds of war among the border- lands populations?

Due to the particular social organisation and hierarchical political structures of the highland cultures of Eritrea and Ethiopia, the highland population of the two countries apparently has a remarkable capacity to reconcile after conflict, as their common destiny as pawns and victims of war also brings them together. Although people participate in the wars as soldiers and supporters, they are also quick to blame it on political leaders who have fanned the animosity. In this manner, physical borders and boundaries of identity at a local level may be conceived differently from state borders and expressions of formal nationalism at inter-state level. As this article demonstrates, the local level border between Eritrea and Ethiopia has become increasingly more porous, while the inter-state border was rigidly defended. Likewise, shared experiences and common interests among the borderland populations on both sides started grassroots processes of reconnecting social and identity formations across the inflexible inter-state border. The focus of this article will thus be on observations of shared sentiments of people-to-people reconciliation and commonalities between the Tigrinya-speaking border populations of Eritrean and Ethiopia, contextualised by the nascent bilateral rapprochement. Before that however, a brief overview of the 'active' and 'cold' war will be presented, as well as the political peace rapprochement taken by Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed after he came to power in April twenty eighteen. First, however, some comments on the methodological limitations to the study.


## 'Balancing the border': methodological limitations

This article is based on almost thirty years of research on Eritrean-Ethiopian relations, starting with long-term anthropological fieldwork in a small village of highland Eritrea at the tail-end of the liberation war, field visits to Eritrea and Tigray in the interim-period of peace, and long-term fieldwork in Tigray during the nineteen ninety-eight to two thousand war. Since then, I have conducted field visits and research work in Ethiopia several times a year, leading up to a research project in twenty seventeen with colleagues from Mekelle University on people-to-people reconciliation in the borderlands. I also carried out field work in the Ethiopian borderlands in Tigray between twenty seventeen and twenty nineteen.

Independent critical research is not permitted in Eritrea. Regrettably, I, as well as many other scholars on Eritrea, have been denied entry to the country since the nineteen ninety-eight to two thousand war. To address this imbalance in empirical data gathering, I have made field visits to Eritrean refugee camps in east Sudan and Tigray. I have also, over two decades, maintained close communication with Eritrean academics, political and human rights representatives, and other refugees in the diaspora. In addition, to canvas the greatest range of personal observations from those affected by the war, I made several field visits to the Ethiopian border town of Zalambessa and its environs. I also crossed the border to visit an Eritrean village caught between the Eritrean trenches and the Ethiopian border, but under military control by Ethiopian defence forces. Eritrean and Tigrayan respondents were generally selected randomly during these field visits. Some, however, were recommended by other Eritreans or Tigrayans.

Fieldwork in border zones may prove challenging as one traverses different political realms. When borderlands are militarised, political and security concerns potentially limit the researcher's operational capability. They may also restrict informants' willingness and ability to talk and comment on sensitive issues. My longitudinal studies of Eritrean-Ethiopian relations, as well as my frequent field visits during almost three decades, however, mitigate these methodological limitations.


## The nineteen ninety-eight to two thousand war

The nineteen ninety-eight to two thousand Eritrean-Ethiopian war was ostensibly fought over a sliver of land, but its root causes were anchored in disputes over history, ideology, economy, and identity. Two sister movements - Eritrean People's Liberation Front and Tigrayan People's Liberation Front - toppled the Derg military junta in

Ethiopia in May nineteen ninety-one. Whilst the Eritrean People's Liberation Front formed an independent government in liberated Eritrea, Tigrayan People's Liberation Front, through its coalition party, Ethiopian Peoples' Revolutionary Democratic Front, assumed power in Addis Ababa. The close relationship demonstrated on the battlefields in northern Ethiopia during the nineteen seventies and nineteen eighties soon soured, however, as economic and political competition turned into a hegemonic struggle for dominance in the Horn of Africa. Small-scale border disputes erupted in the mid-nineteen nineties, as the trust between the two leaderships began to wane. The introduction of the new Eritrean currency in October nineteen ninety-seven and subsequent formalisation of trade between the two countries, put focus for the first time on where the actual border should be demarcated on the ground, as customs and immigration facilities needed to be established.

In early May nineteen ninety-eight, a small border skirmish in Badme, a Western plains village in Ethiopian-administered territory close to the Sudanese border, rapidly escalated into a full-scale bilateral war, as Eritrean forces penetrated deep into areas previously controlled by Ethiopia. The Eritrean surprise attack led to the remobilisation of the Tigrayan People's Liberation Front's guerrilla army by the regional government to defend Tigrayan inhabitants and territory, as well as the federal army to defend the motherland and its sovereignty.

As the conflict escalated the international community scrambled to negotiate the conflict. It soon became clear, however, that both Ethiopia and Eritrea knew this conflict would be settled on the battlefield, and not around the negotiation table. Ethiopian counter-offensives, first to retake Badme in March nineteen ninety-nine, and later in May two thousand on the Tsorona, Zalambessa and Assab fronts, led to devastating losses. The entrenched Eritrean positions were attacked head on by waves of Ethiopian foot soldiers. Tens of thousands of young men perished on the plains of Badme and hillsides of Tsorona. When the Ethiopian military command leadership later assessed the terrible details and losses on the Tsorona front, they reportedly all broke down crying.

During the spring offensive of two thousand, Ethiopia managed finally to break through the Eritrean defense lines on the Western and Central front lines. The Eritrean government ordered a strategic retreat. At the same time they communicated acceptance of a negotiated settlement and cease-fire agreement. Although parts of the Ethiopian military and political leadership wanted to continue the offensive towards Asmara, Prime Minister Meles Zenawi ordered a halt in military operations and indicated a willingness to negotiate. Total Ethiopian losses amounted to close to one hundred thousand killed and two hundred thousand wounded, while Eritrea officially lost nineteen thousand. My personal communications with former high-ranking members of the Eritrean armed forces indicates that the number might be twice as high.

The Algiers peace agreement

A Comprehensive Peace Agreement (called the Algiers Agreement) negotiated by the United Nations and African Union was signed in Algiers in December two thousand, which should have paved the way for border demarcation and normalization of bilateral affairs. At that time the peace agreement was hailed as a success and the international community expressed great optimism for a speedy normalization of relations between the two warring countries. Soon thereafter, however, the peace process stalled as the parties apparently never truly committed themselves politically to implementing fully the subsequent decisions reached in the internationally driven border arbitration process.

The most important aspect of the peace agreement was handled by the Eritrean-Ethiopian Boundary Commission, also known as the Commission, which, on the thirteenth of April two thousand two, made public its ruling on the delimitation of the border. At first, both countries issued statements proclaiming to be the 'winner' in the ruling. When it became clear that Eritrea had gained the contested village of Badme and the district of Irob in Tigray, however, Ethiopia protested the ruling. Badme village in itself is just a small cluster of houses without any significant strategic or economic value. However, as this was the site of the outbreak of hostilities and both parties had sacrificed tens of thousands of troops in order to defend and reconquer the village, Badme had - and still has - a huge symbolic significance for both Eritrea and Ethiopia. The Irob, a small minority group defining themselves as Ethiopians, was granted to Eritrea.

Consequently, the Ethiopian government initially refused to implement the Commission's border ruling in Badme and Irob, but welcomed the demarcation along the rest of the borderline. Since then, both parties have repeatedly accused each other of violating the principles of the peace agreement. The Ethiopian government argued for a more 'flexible' solution to the demarcation on the ground, to avoid for instance local communities being divided by the new border. This request was formally rejected by the Commission, which referred to the fact that the Algiers Agreement did not have any appeals procedure. While the Ethiopian House of Representatives voted on the twenty-fifth of November two thousand four to accept in principle the Commission's decision (through its five-point peace plan), Eritrea rejected any talks prior to Ethiopian withdrawals from occupied territories. Subsequently, in a letter to the United Nations Secretary General of the eighth of June two thousand seven, Ethiopia 'accepts the delimitation decision without precondition'; but the frozen political situation between the two countries stalled any initiative for follow-up on the matter.


## Shifting identities during the period of estrangement: two thousand to twenty eighteen

The devastating nineteen ninety-eight to two thousand war and the subsequent 'no war, no peace' stalemate which entailed a sustained militarization of the border on both sides, kept the borderlands populations physically apart for twenty years. At no other time during a history which stretches back over two thousand years has the Tigrinya-speaking highland population of Tigray and Eritrea been separate for such a long period. War and long-time physical and social separation will eventually lead to a reconfiguration of identities that used to be aligned and considered as affiliated groups. Research conducted in a border village on the Ethiopian side some years after the border closure notes that the younger generations have a very different conceptualization of, and identity towards, their brethren on the Eritrean side, from their parents' generation. The physical separation has naturally made an imprint on their understanding of the 'other' on the other side of the trenches. What used to be conceptualized in terms of 'kinfolk', are now increasingly considered as 'aliens' by the youth. Will this shift in conceptualizing identity, however, be a permanent feature among the borderlands population?

Due to the long separation and feeling of betrayal on both sides, many Eritreans and Ethiopians were hesitant about the possibilities of future reconciliation between the two peoples. Lacking any representative study, my impression is that more Eritreans than Ethiopians initially questioned the possibility for broad-based reconciliation between the two peoples. This may be due to a number of reasons. For one, the continued Ethiopian occupation of territories granted by the Commission to Eritrea sustains the image of Ethiopia as a threat to Eritrean sovereignty. The domestic context in Eritrea has also contributed to and sustained the image of Ethiopia as an enemy: social and political isolation since two thousand; sustained war mobilization; and the lack of access to information and narratives other than that produced by the ruling People's Front for Democracy and Justice. This has been countered to some extent: as Eritrean internal grievances increased due to the regime's repressive nature, more and more Eritreans were saying in private conversations that 'we - the Tigrinya-speakers - are all one and only separated by political leaders'.

Ethiopians have, on the other hand, 'moved on' quickly after the war. They demobilized their war army, the additional forces called up for the duration, and reprioritized their resources to development projects. The restoration and reparation directive enacted in Ethiopia in two thousand nine, which provides for restoration of property rights and compensation for Eritreans expelled during the war, has also shown an official capacity to reconcile and abolish the 'formal enemy image' produced during the war. In addition, as Ethiopia's challenging domestic political developments are the Ethiopian people's main concerns, accordingly, the enmity against Eritreans harbored during the war has long since subsided and been forgotten.

The fortified and closed Eritrea-Ethiopia border only had a sustained direct impact on livelihoods in the borderlands and political development in the northern border region of Tigray. This is also the region with the deepest political legacy of the war, as the Tigrayan People's Liberation Front was the primary adversary of the Eritrean government. Consequently, when the political power balance shifted in Addis Ababa with the change of prime minister in twenty eighteen, so also did the formal bilateral relations between the two countries.


## The peace rapprochement of twenty eighteen

The coming to power of Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed in Ethiopia in April twenty eighteen, at the cost of TPLF dominance over the government, initiated a new approach to formal bilateral relations between Addis Ababa and Asmara. Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed reached out to President Isaias Afwerki of Eritrea and asked for peace between the two brotherly peoples, reassuring him that Ethiopia would respect and implement the Algiers peace agreement and its border demarcation decision. There was no immediate response from Asmara, however. It was not until Ethiopia removed the two most prominent representatives of TPLF control of the Ethiopian 'system' - the army chief of staff Samora Yunis and intelligence head Getachew Assefa - that President Isaias Afwerki was convinced that a genuine shift of power had occurred within the EPRDF government coalition. Thereafter, on the symbolic Martyrs' Day of twenty June twenty eighteen, President Isaias Afwerki commented on the political changes in Ethiopia, stating that the 'end of the TPLF's shenanigans' made a peace process with Ethiopia possible. President Isaias Afwerki's statement underlines the thesis that the war was between the Tigrinya-speaking political elites, and had been converted into an inter-state war. The inter-state border subsequently cemented the schism between the borderlands people created by the war, until subaltern processes driven by the borderlands populations gradually reduced the physical and political division.

After a brief period of talks, Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed travelled to Asmara and met for the first time with President Isaias Afwerki. Together they signed a brief five-point 'Joint Declaration of Peace and Friendship between Eritrea and

Ethiopia', stating: "The state of war between Ethiopia and Eritrea has come to an end. A new era of peace and friendship has been opened'.

Immediately after the signing of the friendship declaration in Addis Ababa in July twenty eighteen diplomatic relations and communication lines between the two countries were restored, and soon Ethiopian Airlines commenced regular flights between the two capital cities. Subsequently, on eleven September twenty eighteen, the military trenches were dismantled and President Isaias Afwerki and Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed opened the border crossings on the ground, and Eritreans and Ethiopians in thousands crossed into each other's countries to reconnect with friends and families on the other side who they had not seen for twenty years. Before this official rapprochement, however, there had been a gradual process over several years of people-to-people contact and reconciliation on the ground, ignoring and undermining the formal enmity between the two states and governments and the solidity of the inter-state border.


## People-to-people reconciliation during conflict

People-to-people contact and reconciliation between Tigrinya-speakers in Eritrea and Ethiopia has been a continuous subaltern process since two thousand, primarily manifested by Eritreans fleeing their country and seeking refuge in Ethiopia. Over five hundred thousand Eritreans have crossed over to Tigray since the Eritrean political crackdown in September two thousand one, despite the official narrative portraying Ethiopia and Tigrayans as the enemy. Reportedly, and confirmed by all Ethiopian and Eritrean sources consulted over the last eighteen years of research, not one Eritrean refugee has reported harassment or vindictive incidents when seeking protection on the Ethiopian side of the border; all informants confirm they had been well received and offered hospitality by the borderland Tigrayans with whom they first came in contact. The informal and formal reception of Eritrean refugees in Tigray confirms the close affinity between the two peoples. Both Ethiopian and Tigrayan authorities have gone far beyond the requirements in the refugee convention to host and care for their Eritrean brethren.

The Eritrean-Ethiopian Afar regional state border in the south-east has always been much more porous than the Eritrea-Tigray border in the north-west; long stretches are without any military fortification. The Afar, a semi-nomadic pastoral people, are divided between Eritrea, Ethiopia and Djibouti. They consider themselves to be first and foremost Afaris, and hence do not regard state borders as socially or culturally relevant to their own livelihoods. Consequently, the flow of people across the Afar Eritrea-Ethiopia border has been more prevalent since two thousand one; many Eritrean Afars have moved across to Ethiopia and settled there temporarily until the Eritrean political situation improves. Few Afars register as refugees in Ethiopia, as they are looked upon as integral members of the Ethiopian Afar communities. This can be seen, for instance, in the case that over twenty per cent of employees in the Afar regional state administration of Ethiopia, are allegedly Eritrean Afars.

Hosting refugees, however, is not in itself proof of mutual reconciliation between the peoples living in the two countries. For that to transpire, sustained two-way cross-border social interaction would need to take place.

As in any war or conflict zone, smuggling operations across no man's land were soon established. Early in my research I heard details of petty trade and movement of contraband, although it was impossible to verify the extent. Across the north-west Tigray-Eritrea border, informal small-scale livestock trade occurred on and off, when the villagers managed to avoid the Eritrean border guards. Similarly, the Afars have conducted traditional low-scale trade across their border, also in livestock and possibly some commodities shipped in across the Red Sea. As contraband will flow across any border regardless of the political context, such activities can not necessarily be regarded as instances of 'reconciliation'.

The first concrete reconciliatory incidents involving a substantial number of people occurred during the annual Maryam Zion religious festival in Axum, a city in northern Ethiopia. Conducted around thirty November every year, the Maryam Zion festival attracts tens of thousands of Christian Orthodox pilgrims from across Ethiopia and Eritrea. Axum locals informed the research team that, in two thousand nine, Eritreans participating in the religious celebration, later returned to their home villages inside Eritrea. Then, in November two thousand fifteen, several hundred, mostly elderly, Eritreans reportedly flocked to Axum. Tigrayan friends and families there played host to them, before they returned to their home country. The common Christian Orthodox identity in the Eritrean-Ethiopian highlands runs deep, and transcends parochial, ethnic, and national identities, and is, as such, a convenient reconciliation medium.


## Life in the 'buffer zone'

The Ethiopian borderlands have been backwaters since two thousand, missing out on the development elsewhere in the country. The border towns and districts have been slowly dying, as the young move to other Ethiopian cities or migrate abroad for better opportunities. As explained by an elderly farmer in the Irob district: 'We have failed them. Our community has failed them. Ethiopia has certainly failed them'.

While the borderland population thus has most to gain in development by reconnecting with their Eritrean counterparts, recent fieldwork in the twin villages of Kinin and Kinto on the Tsorona frontline indicates that similar sentiments are harboured on the Eritrean side too. This area has been militarily controlled by Ethiopian defence forces since a two thousand eleven border skirmish. The Eritrean villagers remained, however, and it is now administered by the neighbouring Ethiopian district (woreda) of Glomekeda in Adigrat zone. But the villagers are caught in a precarious situation, always worrying about possible snipers or the outbreak of a fire-fight, as the Eritrean trenches skirt the villages. While visiting the area, our research team had to stay in the shadows on the Ethiopia-facing side of the small dwellings, in order to stay hidden from Eritrean snipers.

Life in the 'buffer zone' was full of challenges and villagers expressed their grievances about the lack of opportunities and development as long as the border was closed. After adolescence, the youth crossed the border to the south, either to migrate to third countries or seek educational or employment opportunities in Ethiopia. The alternative of staying in the village or going to Asmara or other Eritrean towns did not exist, since they knew that they then would end up in never-ending National Service duty. Even so, Geresus (name altered), a farmer in his early sixties, explained that they are in general doing fine as their livelihood is secured with plenty of farming land in no man's land's zone:

Although we do not receive any help or assistance from our local [Eritrean] authorities, Tigray administration is supplying us with all that we need in terms of social assistance and health care. And our children attend the local Tigrayan community school, as equals to their Ethiopian friends.

But Geresus grieved for the separation of the two people, and longed for the time when the political leaders would allow the people to reconnect at the grassroots. 'We see that our children are friends with their Tigrayan school companions as if the war never happened. Hence, if only the rulers could leave us alone, things would get back to normal quickly'.

In several places in no man's land, children of both countries met while tending the cattle or fetching water from the springs located there. While visiting the trenches of Zalambessa in November two thousand seventeen, we talked to the young Ethiopian herders. They regularly played with Eritrean children to pass the time. A young boy regretted however, that they were not allowed to visit each other's houses, since they then had to pass the enemy trenches. Playing in no man's land under the watchful eyes of snipers from both sides, however, was allowed and a 'normalised' activity.


## Citizens' reconciliation committees

The twin villages of Kinin and Kinto may not be representative of the broader Eritrean border population sentiment, as the area is still under Ethiopian military control. The interest of Eritrean border villages to reconnect with communities on the Ethiopian side, however, has manifested itself in several ways. For instance, the Ethiopian frontline commander in Zalambessa (the main crossing-point between Eritrea-Ethiopia on the road between Mekelle and Asmara) received a request in two thousand seventeen by the three neighbouring Eritrean villages to organise a joint market day for them to buy and sell their produce in Zalambessa. The Ethiopian commander accepted the request, on condition that they also received permission from Asmara in order to safeguard their security when crossing the militarised zone. No such permission was granted by Asmara, however.

At this time, individuals in Zalambessa and Senafe, the border town on the Eritrean side, were working to reestablish social interaction between the twin border settlements. This was later energised by the formal peace declaration, and citizens' reconciliation committees were established to lobby the authorities for an open border. During the summer of two thousand eighteen they started to prepare for the first public joint reconciliation celebration in Zalambessa on the first of September. Being impatient with the sluggishness of the opening of the border on the ground (as only air traffic opened in July), they wanted a public event to mark the new beginning of peace rapprochement at the grassroots. Although supported by local authorities, Zalambessa's reconciliation committee was a private citizens' initiative. On the day, Eritrean and Ethiopian artists were to entertain the crowds and traditional foods would be shared between the people. The event was sponsored by Ethiopian business enterprises, including food suppliers and a local beer brewery. Their counter- part reconciliation committee in the Eritrean border town of Senafe had organised a delegation of three hundred people to join in at the festivities in Zalambessa, and had received prior permission by the Eritrean force commander to cross over to the Ethiopian side. Early morning on the first of September the inhabitants of Zalambessa, in anticipation of the arriving Eritrean delegation, flocked to dismantle the Ethiopian defence line to clear the way for their Eritrean brothers and sisters. As time passed without any delegation appearing, and news spreading that they had been stopped by the Eritrean military, two Ethiopian priests crossed the no man's land zone to clarify the matter with the Eritrean front line commander. There, they discovered that the former force commander and his unit had suddenly been removed, and a new force commander had been placed in charge. He excused himself to the Ethiopian priests saying that he had only been in that position for three days and had received no orders to allow Eritreans to pass into Zalambessa to participate in the reconciliation event.

It appears that the two governments in the capitals far from the borderlands would not allow their formal bilateral process to be overtaken by a grassroots-led reconciliation initiative aiming to soften the rigid inter-state border. The power to do so and to sanction 'reconciliation', was equal to the power to define 'enmity' and war, and was thus the prerogative of the political elites in the respective capitals.

The reconciliation event was conducted despite the absence of the formal Eritrean delegation. Many Eritreans living in Tigray, and a small delegation of Eritrean Afars crossing the border in the lowlands, still participated in the celebrations. At the event, the zonal administrator of Adigrat gave a moving speech addressing the shared history and community among the people of Eritrea and Ethiopia and pledging that the mistakes of the past should be rectified. He was optimistic that the border would be opened up for on-the-ground crossing after the eleventh of September, the Ethiopian New Year. Less than two weeks later, just before going to Jeddah to sign the second peace agreement, President Isaias Afwerki and Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed presided over the official opening of the border on the ground at Zalambessa, and the town was flooded by Eritreans who wanted to reconnect and reconcile with their Tigrayan counterparts.


## A faltering peace process

A year and a half after signing the Eritrea-Ethiopia peace agreement - as this article was written - there appeared to have been no further formal institutionalisation of the peace rapprochement. No agreement formalising cross-border traffic, trade, tariffs, immigration, etc. had been ratified, nor had any information on the operations of the so-called High-level Committee, or its sub-committees mentioned in the peace agreement, been made known.

Newspaper reports indicate that a "road-map" for peace was agreed upon as early as January twenty nineteen. Simultaneously, rumours have circulated that an agreement had been reached on a detailed framework regulating cross-border movement of people and goods, and that only President Isaias Afwerki's approval was pending.

On the issue of demilitarisation and border demarcation, no concrete movements have been made beyond some redeployment of troops away from the border zone. Ethiopian military forces still occupy territories granted to Eritrea by the EEBC, including the symbolic village of Badme and the more sensitive Irob area. No territories have been vacated and returned to Eritrea.

Likewise, Eritrea maintains full mobilisation and has not yet announced any plans to demobilise or to reform the open-ended national service obligation. Neither have any plans been announced for broader political and economic reforms, as for instance instituting the Eritrean Parliament, or implementing the suspended Eritrean Constitution. The country is still governed by Presidential Decrees.

The formal rapprochement initiated last summer has even taken a step back, with the unexpected unilateral decision by Asmara to close the border crossings for Ethiopians to enter Eritrea in late December twenty eighteen, without any official explanation given by Eritrean (or Ethiopian) authorities as to why this was imposed. Only the Oumhajir-Humera crossing remained partly open for traffic, until it was closed suddenly in late April twenty nineteen.

Subsequently, further restrictions were imposed on Eritreans wanting to cross the ground border into Ethiopia by apparently introducing a differentiated policy. The Eritrean border population is apparently allowed to cross back-and forth on foot with few obstacles. Eritreans from Asmara and other inland towns, however, need to apply for permission from their local authorities to travel to Ethiopia. They must then obtain an exit visa from the immigration authorities in Asmara, presumably similar to an ordinary exit visa. At the border, Eritrean authorities seem to have established an immigration facility where "inland" Eritreans need to show their exit permit and register before being allowed to cross over to Zalambessa. People without permits are still crossing, but taking a one-hour detour around the formal check-point. If they are discovered by Eritrean border guards, they are reportedly just ordered to turn back without any further sanction. The active shoot-to-kill policy has thus seemingly been lifted.


## Failure to institutionalise peace

Ethiopia announced in late May twenty nineteen that two trade agreements had been submitted to Asmara for endorsement. One agreement regulated cross-border petty trade, and the other focused on bilateral trade. Interviews conducted in Addis Ababa with high-level government representatives during spring and summer twenty nineteen, however, suggested that these agreements, in addition to a port agreement regulating Ethiopian use of the Eritrean Red Sea ports, in reality had been finalised in early twenty nineteen, but were pending Eritrean input which had been constantly delayed.

Key Ethiopian officials admit off-the-record that "it takes two to tango"; they are frustrated and do not understand why President Isaias Afwerki does not appear to want to move forward and institutionalise the peace process. Even Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed alluded to this when he visited Axum in June twenty nineteen: in response to a question from the audience about when the border would be reopened, he admitted that the peace process had stalled. "It is not only up to us to open the border; there are two sides to the process", he explained to an impatient crowd of Tigrayans. According to Dr Abraha Negash, Vice President of Tigray, Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed also alluded to President Isaias Afwerki's unpredictability in moving the process forward; he believed he had secured an agreement with President Isaias Afwerki to reopen the Zalambessa border crossing in early May twenty nineteen, as the regional government in Tigray received a call from the prime minister's office "to be ready" in Zalambessa for cross-border traffic. The regional government sent reinforcements of police and administrative personnel to the border, but nothing happened, and the border remains closed at the time of writing November twenty nineteen. Despite the stand-still of institutionalisation of the peace process and the lack of response from Asmara, the Ethiopian government is preparing a peace dividend with Eritrea by furthering economic collaboration and integration, with policies aiming to establish joint economic activities along their long border and revamping the infrastructure between the two countries.

Inside Eritrea, however, there are few signs of similar activity. Allegedly, rapprochement with Ethiopia had been discussed at some meetings at different political and administrative levels after the signing of the peace agreement. Some interpret this as a preparation for reforms. So far however, no public commitments or statements have been made to this effect. Indeed, in speeches made by President Isaias Afwerki on Liberation Day, twenty-four May and Martyrs' Day, twenty June twenty nineteen, he neither commented on the peace agreements nor hinted at any forthcoming reforms. Rather, he has used the opportunity to tell the Eritrean people that this is a time to consolidate and take stock of their development efforts, and continue their struggle for development as nothing has changed. Likewise, two months after the Nobel Committee awarded the Nobel Peace Prize to Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed (in beginning of December twenty nineteen), neither President Isaias Afwerki nor any of his spokespeople had publicly commented upon the award or congratulated their 'brother in peace'.

The absence of any institutionalisation of the peace declaration is obviously an increasing concern. Without this, considering the history of outbreak of war in nineteen ninety-eight, the unpredictability of the process is glaring. Currently, the 'peace' and 'reconciliation' content of the formal agreement are concepts held hostage by the political elites in both countries, without any border-population input or influence. Similarly, the resecuritisation of the border restricts its permeability and the possibility of advancing reconciliation and renegotiation of borderlands' identities.


## Consolidating peace and reconciliation bottom-up?

Notwithstanding the hobbled formal top-level negotiation process and the set-back of closing the border, informal people-to-people reconciliation continues. Border populations are reconnecting as individuals and families, neighbouring communities, and even as local government administrators, and security forces on both sides of the border. Eritreans in the borderlands cross back and forth every day, although in dwindling numbers, for petty trade, to buy necessities, to visit friends and family, or to participate in religious or social ceremonies.

Paradoxically, the peace rapprochement led to a huge surge in Eritrean refugees into Ethiopia, a trend which continued after the border crossing was closed. The opening of the border in September twenty eighteen radically increased the flight of Eritrean refugees, as they no longer fear being shot by the Eritrean border patrols. Numbers from the spring of twenty nineteen given by local authorities in northern Ethiopia indicates that about two hundred fifty Eritreans cross every day and register as refugees. In addition, a sizeable group cross over and settle in Tigray or elsewhere in Ethiopia without registering as refugees. Elsa (name altered) is a representative of this category. I met her in the border town of Zalambessa, where she stood in the doorway of her small guesthouse and restaurant. 'All I want is to start a business and establish a future, without interference by the government', she explained. Elsa left her mother and father behind in her hometown of Senafe after the border between Eritrea and Ethiopia opened for free crossing in mid-September twenty eighteen. Her small business in Zalambessa is capitalising on the renewed cross-border traffic, as the town experiences an economic up-turn as its peace dividend. When asked if she has been back to Senafe, she looked puzzled and claimed: 'Why? Whatever should I do in Senafe when the situation is as it is in Eritrea? I feel at home here in Zalambessa now'.

Local Tigrayan authorities in Zalambessa, as well as zonal authorities in Adigrat, confirmed that they communicate with their local government counterparts in Eritrea on issues of mutual concern. Likewise, both the front line force commander and security head in Zalambessa also stated that they talk regularly with their Eritrean counterparts, in order to 'administer' the fragile situation on the ground for the betterment of the border populations on both sides. It is doubtful, however, whether this localised cross-border communication between public entities is channelled through their respective capitals; this is a pragmatic approach adopted by state representatives on the ground, for various reasons and motivations. For instance, in lieu of a formal bilateral agreement regulating cross-border employment and business activities, in order to support themselves, the Tigray regional government has allowed all Eritreans to establish businesses without any licence and under temporary tax exemption. This situation has arisen because the TPLF believes it is best for Eritrea's future if as many Eritreans as possible stay in Tigray. This will enable a quick return after the situation changes in Asmara; they consider that the dire demographic haemorrhage of the Eritrean population will constitute the key challenge to rebuilding the country after a change of government.


## Machinations and reconciliation: concluding remarks on the politics of peace

Complicating the consolidation of a sustainable people-to-people reconciliation process is the increasingly politicised and polarised context within Ethiopia, where the government party is de facto split, rendering the federal government incapacitated and unable to implement policy in several regions, in particular Tigray. As it seems clear that the peace rapprochement was entered into by President Isaias Afwerki due to the loss of power in Addis Ababa, Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed has kept the TPLF in the dark regarding the formal bilateral process. But, it is not Addis Ababa which controls the main border to Eritrea, but Mekelle. The tripartite elite power struggle between Asmara-Addis Ababa-Mekelle over defining the inter-state border and conditions on the ground, have thus a direct impact on grassroots people-to-people reconciliation.

This is made explicitly in relation to the return of the Eritrean territories of Badme and Irob. The local populations in these two areas have articulated fear and insecurity in relation to the peace process and the possibility of displacement if their home areas are given to Eritrea (or 'coerced' to become Eritrean). A particular concern is expressed by the Irob minority group, whose homeland is nestled up against the Eritrean border, a part of which is granted to Eritrea according to the ruling. The local Irob administrator Nigussie Hagos explains:

The decision would pose a big threat to the survival of the Irob people. We are not against the peace deal. But peace should not come at the expense of losing sovereignty. We are one hundred percent Ethiopians. If our peoples are divided between two countries, our very survival would be in question.

Abba Tuum, Irob's Catholic parish priest, insisted that the only way to maintain peace in the Irob borderlands would be for any border-delineation process to include local elders from both sides of the border who would use customary mechanisms of reconciliation to settle the demarcation. In this way, the decision, anchored in international law, would be translated to the ground through customary law, and would thus obtain local legitimacy and respect.

The temporary reopening of the border in September twenty eighteen proved that the deep-rooted relationships between the people straddling the border are intact, even after twenty years of separation. It is thus doubtful that the renewed separation will recreate new enemy images. As the border peoples understand that the political conflict over the last two decades is an elite driven one, they are increasingly aware that, so too, is the formal politics of peace. It seems plausible that sustainable reconciliation in the Eritrean-Ethiopian borderlands would need to rely on grassroots-anchored processes, rather than politically motivated and irresolute formal peace declarations.