## All-Solid-State Reference Electrode with Heterogeneous Membrane

ABSTRACT: Novel reference electrodes with a solid contact coated by a heterogeneous polymer membrane are described. The electrodes are obtained using silver bromide and silver nanoparticles, potassium bromide suspended in tetrahydrofuran solution of polyvinyl chloride and DOS and deposited on a silver substrate, or another substrate covered with silver, by drop casting. After a short period of soaking in a potassium bromide solution, stable and reproducible formal potentials of negative one hundred fifty-seven ± two millivolts (vs silver/silver-chloride/three molar potassium chloride) were observed, and the solid-contact reference electrodes were ready to use. It is shown that the described reference electrodes are relatively insensitive to changes in the sample matrix, the concentrations of ions, the pH, and the redox potential. These electrodes can also be fabricated in miniaturized form, and thus used to produce miniaturized multielectrode probes.

The application of a conducting polymer as a solid contact for ion-selective electrodes with polymeric (e.g., polyvinyl chloride) membranes has opened a new avenue in potentiometry. Different all-solid-state indicator and reference electrodes have since then been reported, and interest in solid contact ion-selective electrodes is a mainstream of potentiometry today. Solid contact reference electrodes, owing to their high metrological demands and distinctively different design techniques, occupy a know-how niche of their own.

A significant technical challenge is in selecting the materials and procedures that would be compatible in production for both solid contact ion-selective electrodes and solid contact reference electrodes. In the case of all-solid-state polyvinyl chloride electrodes, an obviously advantageous approach would be the application of the same material, for example, conducting polymer and polyvinyl chloride. Some benefits can be gained by using organic salts and ionic liquids dispersed in polyvinyl chloride or inorganic salts in inert polymer binders. So far, the electrochemical mechanism of all-solid-state reference electrodes is not sufficiently elucidated, which prompts the researcher to use trial-error methods. A general electrochemical rationale points to a condition of the equitransferent liquid junctions. However, in the case of solid contact reference electrodes, one has the asymmetric junction between the solid contact and solution, and the applicability of the equitransferent condition is challenged. To understand the mechanism of solid contact reference electrodes, the concept of pseudoreference electrode and a "stable-in-a matrix" diffusion potential can be useful, but it appears that a more comprehensive interpretation is needed. At the moment though, further developments primarily depend on the practical purpose, the scope of applications and technical inventiveness.

For both theoretical and practical reasons, the most popular reference electrodes are silver chloride electrode systems (e.g., silver/silver-chloride/potassium-chloride) used in different configurations. An inventive approach was the introduction of a composite membrane made of polyvinyl acetate containing a very large loading of potassium chloride in a one-to-one weight ratio of potassium chloride to polyvinyl acetate. Very recently,

polypropylene has been successfully used as the binding polymer for the same purpose with the advantage of production by injection molding. In this report, we show that a composite based on polyvinyl chloride membrane containing nanoparticles of silver, silver bromide, potassium bromide, and potassium bromoargentates allows the design of a solid-contact reference electrode. In general, even the conventional silver/silver-bromide electrodes are rarely used and, to our knowledge, the system reported has never been explicitly described.

Our technical note sees an avenue for a new class of reference electrodes with heterogeneous membranes. We show that, by conventional drop casting, it is possible to obtain all-solid-state reference electrodes coupled with excellent analytical properties.


## EXPERIMENTAL SECTION

Reagents. Bis(2-ethylhexyl) sebacate, tetrabutylammonium tetrabutylborate, and polyvinyl chloride high molecular weight were purchased from Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland. Silver nanowires of diameter one hundred seventy-five nanometers by length twenty to fifty micrometers as zero point five percent suspension in isopropanol obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany were used as received. Tetrahydrofuran purchased from Sigma-Aldrich was distilled before use.

The other compounds used were obtained as pure analytical form POCh, Poland and Merck, Germany and used as received. The gases were obtained from Linde Gas, Poland.

Water redistilled from quartz was used to prepare the solutions. All solutions with concentrations lower than zero point zero one molar were prepared just before use.

Preparation of Reference Electrode Cocktails. Silver bromide was precipitated from three molar silver nitrate with the three molar potassium bromide solution. Precipitated salt was filtered

(without washing) and dried at one hundred degrees Celsius. Potassium bromide pure analytical was dried at three hundred degrees Celsius and ground to a fine powder. Next, silver bromide and potassium bromide were mixed in a molar ratio one to five, and the mixture was thoroughly ground again and exposed to light to allow for photochemical decomposition of silver bromide. The presence of metallic silver nanoparticles was proved by XPS and silver bromide by XRD analysis. Bis(2-ethylhexyl)-sebacate and polyvinyl chloride of total mass three point three grams and thirty-five to fifty weight percent of polyvinyl chloride were dissolved in twenty-five milliliters of freshly distilled tetrahydrofuran.

Three types of tetrahydrofuran solutions containing bromide salts (cocktails) were used.

The first contained zero point three three six grams of silver-bromide/potassium-bromide in one point five milliliters of the solution. This cocktail (owing to the small amount of silver nanoparticles produced during the photochemical reaction) is depicted and referred to below as "REF-Br-photo".

The third type of reference cocktail contained an additional amount of metallic silver formed during the redox reaction of silver bromide with reducing agent, for example, tetrabutylammonium tetrabutylborate. To prepare this cocktail, tetrabutylammonium tetrabutylborate was added to the solution containing the silver-bromide/potassium-bromide suspension. The amount of tetrabutylammonium tetrabutylborate introduced to one point five milliliters of suspension containing zero point three three six grams silver-bromide/potassium-bromide was varied from one to twenty-five milligrams. After tetrabutylammonium tetrabutylborate addition, the cocktail color changed from light yellow to dark brown owing to the formation of metallic silver, as proved by XPS. The reference membranes prepared from such cocktails are called "REF-Br-QB".

Regarding the major components, the typical composition of the above three membranes used in our studies was (in percentage weight/weight): fifteen point two (silver-bromide), forty-seven point eight (potassium-bromide), twenty-three point one (DOS), and thirteen point nine (polyvinyl chloride).

Preparation of the Reference Electrodes. Before membrane casting, each cocktail was vigorously mixed and a cloudy mixture of one hundred to two hundred microliters was deposited on the silver substrate as well as on the glassy carbon or the gold substrate covered with silver and (for comparison) on the pure glassy carbon or gold. The electrodeposition of a silver layer on the glassy carbon or gold substrates was done in zero point zero five molar silver-nitrate solution using an Autolab PGSTAT-one hundred analyzer in the three-electrode electrochemical cell. The silver chloride electrode silver/silver-chloride/saturated potassium-chloride with a bridge filled with the one molar potassium-nitrate solution was used as the reference electrode. A platinum sheet with an area of about two square centimeters was used as an auxiliary electrode. The deposition potential was adjusted to a current density of one point five to three milliamperes per square centimeter and a typical deposition time was one thousand seconds.

Prior to silver electrodeposition, the glassy carbon or gold electrodes were polished with zero point three micrometer aluminum oxide and subsequently sonicated for at least five minutes in water, zero point one molar potassium hydroxide in ethanol, bidistilled water, five percent nitric acid, and finally rinsed with bidistilled water and dried. These substrates with a deposited silver layer are denoted in the text as glassy carbon/silver or gold/silver. Before the reference membrane casting, the surfaces of the silver, glassy carbon/silver, or gold/silver were rinsed with methanol and tetrahydrofuran. The reference cocktails were allowed to dry for at least twenty-four hours, and after that the quality of the dry reference bromide membranes was inspected using an optical microscope to check for possible faults, namely, adhesion to the substrate, compactness of the membrane layer, the presence of cracks, and uncovered substrate areas,

and to select the membranes without faults for further experiments.

Apparatus. The potentiometric measurements were performed using a homemade sixteen-channel setup. The input impedance was greater than ten to the power of thirteen ohms and the input current was lower than twenty femtoamperes for each of the sixteen inputs as well as for the reference electrode input. The multichannel potential-meter was coupled with a personal computer equipped with a sixteen-bit resolution data acquisition card PCI DAS six thousand fourteen and custom-made software. In typical conditions, the potential resolution was better than zero point zero two millivolts.

In the potentiometric measurements the double junction reference two hundred fifty-one reference electrodes were used. All the experiments were performed at room temperature, twenty-two to twenty-four degrees Celsius. Stirring up to five hundred revolutions per minute did not significantly affect the readouts.


## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

One. The rate of standard potential stabilization and its repeatability. Freshly prepared electrodes with dry reference bromide membranes were immersed in two molar potassium bromide and their potential changes were recorded. The shortest soaking time, usually several tens of seconds, was needed for electrodes with reference bromide nanomembranes. A longer soaking, several hundreds of seconds, was required for the electrodes with reference bromide photo membranes, while the longest was for the electrodes with reference bromide quantum dot membranes. The short-time behavior of the electrodes is similar for the metallic silver and the substrates with a deposited silver layer on nonsilver electronically conducting substrates, for example, glassy carbon, as shown in Figure one.

The results show the convergence of the short-time potentials, for the five electrodes used, to less than three millivolts after a few minutes of soaking. The mean potential after twenty minutes is negative one hundred fifty-seven point six three plus or minus one point zero nine millivolts.

Two. Long-Term Potential Stability of the Electrodes with Reference Bromide Reference Membranes. For several hundreds of all the types of reference bromide membranes studied, the stable and reproducible potential readouts collected are all located in a rather narrow potential range to the mean potential negative one hundred fifty-seven plus or minus ten millivolts. No systematic lifetime experiments were undertaken. However, for the same subtypes of electrodes, typically in a series of five to sixteen electrodes, the potentials were reproducible within plus or minus two millivolts during continuous measurement for ten days in two molar potassium bromide. These were the electrodes with the reference membranes deposited on silver substrate embedded in a polyvinyl chloride body. This design facilitates the adhesion of polyvinyl chloride membrane to the polyvinyl chloride body which is advantageous to the electrodes' lifetime.

Three. Substrate Influence on the Standard Potential Value and Its Stability. Excellent potential reproducibility and long-term potential stability were observed for all reference bromide membranes deposited on silver substrate or with glassy carbon or gold substrate covered with the silver layer. The membrane was unattached from the substrate and the presence of silver, potassium, and bromide was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy/energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy on both sides of the membrane, Figure two.

The largest amount of silver and bromide were determined on the side of the membrane in contact with Ag substrate, whereas for the other side, mainly bromide and potassium signals were detected.

If the reference membranes were placed directly on GC or Au substrate, unpredictable and unstable potential values were recorded.

Four. EIS Spectra for Electrodes with REF-Br Membranes Deposited on Silver or Nonsilver Substrate. The influence of the Ag phase was inspected by electrochemical impedance (EIS).

A striking difference in the impedance spectra for electrodes with reference membranes deposited on Ag substrate or nonsilver substrate was observed. Namely, the difference is manifested by a disappearance of a low-frequency branch for the membranes deposited on Ag substrate which is present if the substrate is a nonsilver one. The EIS results indicate a slower electrochemical process rate in the membrane without dispersed Ag. The appearance of Warburg type behavior at lower frequencies can be attributed to a slower ion-transport in the membrane. It can be hypothesized that dispersed silver facilitates the overall electrochemical process.

The EIS spectra illustrating this effect, recorded for electrodes with REF-Br-photo membranes deposited on a bare GC substrate and for the GC substrate covered with Ag are presented in Figure S-2.

Five. Mechanism of the Br-REF Response. Undoubtedly, the fact that the metallic silver, both as the layer on the substrate and in the form of dispersed nanosilver in the membrane, significantly contribute to stabilizing the potential of the REF-Br systems is of general importance to solid contact ion-sensor technology with heterogeneous membranes. The composite-like heterogeneous membrane serves as the reservoir of Ag, AgBr, KBr, and respective silver bromide complexes. The coexistence of these three solid phases coupled through the contact with the respective ions (silver, potassium bromoargentate, and bromide ions) saturating pores and slow electrolyte outflow from the membrane is the prerequisite of the stability observed. Interestingly, the mean standard potential of the REF-Br electrodes (negative one hundred fifty seven millivolts versus Ag/AgCl/three Molar KCI (Eº equals positive two hundred ten millivolts versus NHE)) indicates that the composite reference electrode works as the analogue of the Ag/AgBr reference electrode immersed in the heterogeneous membrane, which plays the role of a stable electrolyte bridge. The bridge provides a stable electrochemical matrix, in respect to the coexistence of the phases, ion concentrations, single ion diffusion, and activity coefficients. Generalized mathematical interpretation which reduces potential stability of the REF-Br electrodes to the fundamental Gibbs' Phase Rule and Eº set by Ag plus/Ag redox pair will be provided by the authors in a separate paper.

From the technical perspective, though, the system in focus is sufficiently attractive to be of choice in different analytical applications as shown below.

Six. Calibration of the REF-Br Electrodes in KBr and MX Solutions. A crucial question regarding the conceptual and analytical validity of the REF-Br is their insensitivity toward bromides. Figure three shows the potential changes of the five electrodes with REF-Br-photo membranes as well as Br-ISE recorded during calibration with KBr solution. A striking difference provides direct proof of the invention reported.

Negligible potential changes were observed for electrodes with REF-Br-nano, REF-Br-QB, and REF-Br-photo reference membranes during up-down-up as well as down-up-down calibrations in KCI solutions with concentration ranging from one Molar up to ten to the negative fifth power Molar. As an example, the potential values measured during up-down-up calibration are presented. Similar results were also obtained during calibration in LiCl, NaCl, KBr, KNO3, and CaCl2 solutions. The influence of lipophilic ions was also checked using the representative perchlorate ion. No statistically significant effect was observed between the calibrations performed in chloride and perchlorate salts.

Seven. Redox Sensitivity of the Electrodes with REF-Br Membranes. The presence of elemental silver can induce undesirable redox sensitivity of the REF-Br membranes. Therefore, all the membranes were studied in the calibration using the mixture of K3[Fe(CN)6]/ K[Fe(CN)6] with total concentration zero point zero one Molar but different molar ratios. Before and after redox calibration, additional measurements in two Molar KBr were performed to check the potential stability. The redox insensitivity was proved for all the REF-Br membranes and different substrates. The redox effect was not observed as well in the solutions saturated with O2, CO2, and Ar.

Eight. Potential Stability of the REF-Br Electrodes during Prolonged Contact with Deionized Water. For every reference electrode, the test of its behavior in water is most challenging and analytically relevant. For this reason, all the electrodes equipped with REF-Br-nano, REF-Br-QB, or REF-Br-photo reference membranes were tested in deionized water. After a due period of soaking, the potential of the REF-Br electrodes was measured for ten minutes versus the commercial silver chloride reference electrode. A very good potential stability was observed, and the potentials measured were practically invariant at least for several hours of contact with water (or even up to a few days for some of the electrodes). The results are summarized.

Nine. Multisolution Calibration Experiment. To judge the performance of the reference electrodes in real analysis, a multisolution calibration was carried out following the protocol shown by Mousavi et al. The potential of the electrodes with REF-Br-nano, REF-Br-QB, and REF-Br-photo reference membranes was measured in several solutions to check the influence of ion concentration, pH and ion mobility. The potential in each solution was recorded for ten minutes. After each test, the electrodes were rinsed with deionized water and immersed in the subsequent solution. The exemplary results obtained for electrodes with REF-Br-photo reference membranes deposited on Ag substrates and the potential values measured at the end of each ten minute period are shown in Figures four and summarized.

Ten. Influence of pH: Potential Stability of the Electrodes with REF-Br Reference Membranes during Acid-Base Titration. To check the pH influence on the potential of the reference electrodes, the REF-Br-photo reference membranes and pH-ISE were employed in the titration of one milliliter of zero point one Molar NaOH with zero point one Molar HCl. As required, both reference membranes are insensitive to pH changes in the course of the titration performed.

Eleven. Performance of the Microcell with REF-Br Reference and Potassium-Ion Selective Electrodes. In this measurement, a homemade multielectrode platform with a body made of epoxy resin was used. The platform contained five gold wire electrodes (Au ninety-nine point ninety-nine obtained from Johnson Matthey Company) with a diameter of zero point eight millimeters. The external diameter of the epoxy body was eight millimeters. All the gold discs were electrochemically covered with silver, and the REF-Br- photo membranes and potassium-selective membranes were deposited by solution cast on selected discs. Negligible potential changes were recorded for both electrodes with REF-Br-photo membranes used and close to theoretical potential changes were recorded for K-ISE. These results indicate that employing the reference electrodes described here for designing a complete multielectrode microcell is feasible. Moreover, the junctionless REF-Br reference electrode is used in two roles as the external reference electrode and the internal solid-contact of the ion- selective electrode. Interestingly, a similar dual role has been reported by the authors before. However, in that case, the same conducting polymer film was employed either as the solid contact or as the electroactive membrane of an ion-selective electrode.


## CONCLUSIONS

A simple procedure for obtaining analytical quality solid-state reference electrodes by a solution cast method is shown. It is made possible by applying a cocktail containing the mixture of KBr, AgBr, and Ag nanoparticles suspended in PVC/DOS/THF solution and drop casting of the cocktail on Ag substrates. The soaking in two Molar KBr for approximately several hundred seconds is sufficient to activate the electrodes characterized with reproducible and stable potential. This potential is in the range of negative one hundred fifty-seven plus or minus two millivolts versus silver chloride electrode, which indicates that the operation mechanism is similar to that of the silver bromide reference electrode, but not the same owing to the role played by the composite heterogeneous membrane. Carefully designed tests to check the performance of the reference electrodes proved the insensitivity of the REF-Bromine electrodes to repeated and challenging changes in the solution composition, pH, concentration, mobility, and lipophilicity of ions, as well as the presence of redox species. Electrodes of this type possess comparable properties to high-quality commercially available reference electrodes. Additionally, as all-solid-state electrodes, they can be fabricated in miniaturized form and thus be applied when designing miniaturized multielectrode platforms and probes.


## ASSOCIATED CONTENT

Supporting Information