## Research The Kok effect revisited

Summary

The Kok effect refers to the abrupt decrease around the light compensation point in the slope of net photosynthetic rate versus irradiance. Arguably, this switch arises from light inhibition of respiration, allowing the Kok method to estimate day respiration. Recent analysis suggests that increasing proportions of photorespiration quantified as the ratio of carbon dioxide compensation point to chloroplast carbon dioxide concentration with irradiance explain much of the Kok effect. Also, the Kok method has been modified to account for the decrease in PSII photochemical efficiency with irradiance.

Using a model that illustrates how varying day respiration, the ratio of carbon dioxide compensation point to chloroplast carbon dioxide concentration, photochemical efficiency, and proportions of alternative electron transport could engender the Kok effect, we quantified the contribution of these parameters to the Kok effect measured in sunflower across various oxygen and carbon dioxide concentrations and various temperatures.

Overall, the decreasing photochemical efficiency with irradiance explained approximately twelve percent, and the varying ratio of carbon dioxide compensation point to chloroplast carbon dioxide concentration explained approximately twenty-five percent, of the Kok effect. Maximum real light inhibition of day respiration was much lower than the inhibition derived from the Kok method, but still increased with photorespiration.

Photorespiration had a dual contribution to the Kok effect, one via the varying ratio of carbon dioxide compensation point to chloroplast carbon dioxide concentration and the other via its participation in light inhibition of


## day respiration.

Introduction

The lower estimates of day respiration by the Kok method, relative to respiration in the dark, have been confirmed by other gas exchange-based methods such as the popular Laisk method. By applying the Laisk method to different light intensities, it has been shown that day respiration was progressively inhibited by increasing irradiance. However, this light inhibition has been challenged by the direct measurement of day respiration, which exploits the differences in the time course of labeling by carbon isotopes of photosynthetic, photorespiratory and respiratory pathways. For example, using such techniques, Pinelli and Loreto suggested a significant refixation of respired and photorespired carbon dioxide and Loreto et al. calculated that there would be no significant difference between day respiration and respiration in the dark if the refixation of carbon dioxide released from respiration during illumination were taken into account. Similarly, a recent report using a direct method based on isotopic disequilibrium showed that day respiration was underestimated by the Laisk method. Owing to inconsistent reports of this kind, whether the Kok effect was a result of light inhibition of leaf respiration has been under debate over years.

In fact, according to an extended form of the widely used model of Farquhar et al. for describing the electron transport-limited photosynthesis, several other mechanisms could also explain the Kok effect. The extended model expresses the net carbon dioxide assimilation rate as a function of the photosynthetically absorbed irradiance as:

carbon dioxide assimilation rate equals the ratio of one minus carbon dioxide compensation point divided by chloroplast carbon dioxide concentration to four times one plus twice the carbon dioxide compensation point divided by chloroplast carbon dioxide concentration multiplied by the activity function of photochemical efficiency, rho two, and photosynthetically absorbed irradiance minus day respiration. Equation one.

where C subscript c is the carbon dioxide concentration at the carboxylating sites of Rubisco, Gamma superscript star is the carbon dioxide compensation point in the absence of

Phi subscript two is the photochemical efficiency of photosystem two electron transport, rho subscript two is the fraction of the absorbed photons partitioned to photosystem two, and F subscript act is the factor accounting for fractions of alternative electron transport. So, the term left parenthesis Phi subscript two rho subscript two I subscript abs right parenthesis is the flux of photosystem two electron transport. Parameters F subscript act and O subscript two fied by the extended model as:

F subscript act equals one minus the fraction f subscript pseudo divided by one minus f subscript cvc. rho subscript two equals the fraction one minus f subscript cyc divided by one minus f subscript cyc plus Phi subscript two divided by Phi subscript l. Equation two

Equation three where Phi subscript one is the photochemical efficiency of photosystem one electron transport, F subscript cyc is the fraction of the photosystem one electron flux that follows the cyclic electron transport around photosystem one, and F subscript pseudc is the fraction of the photosystem one electron flux that follows the pseudocyclic electron transport (defined as all noncyclic electron-consuming pathways other than the Calvin cycle or the photorespiratory cycle).

Equation one suggests that changes not only in R subscript d (Figure two a), but also in Gamma superscript star over C subscript c, Phi subscript two, F subscript act and rho subscript two, with increasing I subscript abs, result in changes in the slope of A versus I subscript abs. Notably, Farquhar and Busch recently demonstrated that as a result of regulation of stomatal conductance left parenthesis g subscript s right parenthesis and mesophyll conductance left parenthesis g subscript m right parenthesis, C subscript c decreased (thus Gamma superscript star over C subscript c increased) sharply with increasing I subscript abs within the range of low irradiances, and that this phenomenon accounted for much of the observed Kok effect (Figure two b). A similar argument might be applied to Phi subscript two (Figure two c), as Phi subscript two is not constant but decreases with increasing I subscript abs, even within the range of low irradiances within which the Kok method is used to estimate R subscript four and Phi subscript carbon dioxide. Accounting for the decrease of Phi sub two with increasing irradiance has resulted in a modified method to estimate R sub d. The analysis using the modified method, now known as the Yin method, indicates that the inhibition of R sub d by light is less than the original Kok method suggests.

Less information is available on the change in f sub act or in rho sub two with I sub abs that could partly explain the Kok effect. Peltier and Sarrey indicated that the inhibition of chlororespiration, a process in chloroplasts that involves a respiratory electron transport chain within the thylakoid membrane, might be responsible for the Kok effect. Data of Zhang et al. and Ver Sagun et al. suggested that cyclic electron transport around PSI increased with increasing I sub abs. If this also applies to the limiting light conditions, an increase in f sub cyc with increasing I sub abs would predict a part of the Kok effect. According to equations two and three, f sub cyc has a dual effect on the expression of the Kok effect, that is, via both terms f sub act and rho sub two. Equation three suggests that parameter rho sub two, related to state transition, could be affected not only by f sub cyc but also by the Phi sub two over Phi sub one ratio. Tcherkez et al. speculated the possible role of state transition in the Kok effect. The model of equations one to three predicts that an increase in f sub cyc or in Phi sub two over Phi sub one with increasing I sub abs leads to the state transition in favor of PSI with increasing irradiance, and this could engender part of the Kok effect.

The Kok effect is not ubiquitous. Early reports found little Kok effect at low oxygen conditions and in C sub four plants. These observations have led to suggestions that photorespiration might be involved in the Kok effect, as confirmed by other studies where photorespiration was manipulated by changing measurement temperatures or by lowering leaf water potential. Again, the model analyses of Farquhar and Busch demonstrated that the change in Gamma star over C sub c therefore, in relative amounts of photorespiration, with increasing I sub abs can explain much of the diminution of the Kok effect in C sub four plants and at low oxygen or high carbon dioxide concentrations or low temperatures. They also showed that the change in Gamma star over C sub c can generate the apparent inhibition of R sub d as inferred by the Laisk method, which is based on A minus C sub i curves at two or more irradiances, where C sub i is the intercellular carbon dioxide concentration. The decrease in C sub i with increasing I sub abs is the result of stomatal regulation, and its influence on estimates of R sub d by the Kok method was noted by Kirschbaum and Farquhar, who proposed a method to correct for this decrease in C sub i . The further drawdown in C sub c, relative to C sub i, is regulated by g sub m. The Kok method would underestimate R sub d if light-dependent changes in C sub i or in C sub c are not corrected for. Simple g sub s and g sub m models when coupled with photosynthesis models like equations one to three can account for the refixation of carbon dioxide released from respiration and photorespiration, and in fact, the refixation fractions of photorespired carbon dioxide can be calculated analytically from stomatal, mesophyll and carboxylation resistances. As such, the light inhibition of R sub d predicted for photorespiratory conditions by Farquhar and Busch and the need to correct for light-dependent changes in C sub i and C sub c are basically analogous to the statement of Loreto et al that the lower R sub d than R sub dl resulted from the failure of the original Kok or Laisk methods in accounting for the refixation of respired carbon dioxide in the light.

However, there are cases where the Kok effect is not always associated with photorespiration. The change in the slope was occasionally observed to be present under high-carbon dioxide conditions, and in C four leaves and under low-oxygen conditions albeit to a smaller extent. Gong et al. reported an even lower R sub D to R sub D K ratio in C four than in C three leaves. Buckley et al. observed a similar extent of change in the slope under both twenty-one percent and two percent oxygen conditions for broad-bean mature leaves. Nevertheless, the Kok effects reported in the early years are mostly associated with the abrupt transition in the slope, whereas the G five minus G M photosynthesis model predicts only a smooth transition.

Of the possible mechanisms that potentially explain the magnitude of the Kok effect, F sub A C T and Rho sub two are hard to measure accurately by existing equipment, especially at low irradiances along the Kok curve. Also, the pattern of changing R sub D in response to I sub abs is hard to quantify with existing methods. In this study, we will illustrate, using equations one through three, that how R sub four responds to I sub abs would have relevance to the Kok effect and in estimating Phi sub carbon dioxide. We surmise that if the varying Gamma star over C sub C ratio is a major factor accounting for the Kok effect, as stated by Farquhar and Busch, then the magnitude of the Kok effect should be associated with the Gamma star over C sub C ratio, regardless of how the variation of this ratio is created. To this end, we designed an experiment in which we used various oxygen and carbon dioxide concentrations or temperatures to generate varying relative amounts of photorespiration, that is, various Gamma star over C sub C ratios. Based on a modelling analysis of the experimental data we quantitatively assess: whether the change of Gamma star divided by C sub c and the decrease of Phi sub two with increasing I sub abs could explain, in part, the Kok effect; if so, what the relative contribution of the two components is in determining the Kok effect; and what the maximum real inhibition of R sub d by light is. We demonstrate that our results help to identify common threads explaining seemingly contradictory findings among previous studies on


## R sub d. Materials and Methods

Plant materials and measurements

Plants of sunflower (Helianthus annuus, cv 'Sunspot') were grown in pots in a growth chamber (day: night temperature, twenty-five : twenty degrees Celsius; relative humidity, seventy percent; photon flux density, approximately five hundred micromole per meter squared per second at the soil level; photoperiod, sixteen hours, zero six hundred to twenty-two hundred hours) in Wageningen. Five seeds were sown and seedlings were thinned to one plant per seven-liter pot. Initial amounts of soil nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P) and potassium (K) were zero point sixty-two, zero point eighty-three, and one point zero four grams per pot, respectively. Nutrient solution was added two or three times per week based on the expected plant growth. Seeds were sown weekly for four weeks, creating four replications. Measurements were conducted on the eleventh or twelfth fully expanded leaf counting from the bottom, using one plant per replication.

An open gas exchange system (Li-Cor sixty-eight hundred; Li-Cor Incorporated, Lincoln, Nebraska, U S A) and an integrated fluorescence chamber head of six centimeters squared were used for three sets of measurements, in which various O sub two or CO sub two concentrations or various temperatures were used to create different amounts of photorespiration (Table one). The first set used five O sub two concentrations. Four cylinders containing different mixtures of O sub two and N sub two were used. Gas from the cylinder was supplied to the Li-Cor sixty-eight hundred where CO sub two was blended with O sub two. For the second set, five different ambient CO sub two (Ca)

concentrations in the leaf chamber were used (Table one). For the third set, four leaf temperatures were used (Table one). A flow rate of two hundred micromole per second was used, and leaf-to-air vapor pressure difference was maintained within zero point eight to one point six kilopascals, for all measurements.

For a given O sub two, CO sub two or temperature, a photosynthetic response curve to incident irradiance A minus I sub inc was measured. Leaves were first acclimated under eighty micromole per meter squared per second until A reached a steady state, which took approximately forty-five minutes. Measurements were then undertaken using a sequence of eighty, seventy, sixty, fifty, forty, thirty, twenty-five, twenty, fifteen, ten, and five micromole per meter squared per second, with six minutes for each step. For measurements in each of the first two sets, O sub two or CO sub two concentrations were chosen randomly. Measurements of the temperature set were conducted after the O sub two and CO sub two sets to avoid possible after-effects of high temperature on leaves. For the same reason, the four temperatures were set up from low to high rather than randomly.

After the measurements for A minus I sub inc curves, A minus C sub i curves were determined to provide extra data to estimate g sub m. Leaves were adapted to an I sub inc of one hundred micromole per meter squared per second at twenty-five degrees Celsius and twenty-one percent O sub two until A became stable, and curves were measured using a C sub a sequence of four hundred, two hundred, one hundred, seventy-five, fifty, four hundred, four hundred, five hundred fifty, eight hundred and fifteen hundred micromole per mole, with three minutes per step. Apparent A minus C sub i curves were also assessed with heat-killed leaves, which showed that CO sub two leakage was negligible during our measurement using the Li-Cor sixty-eight hundred.

For each step of either the A minus I sub inc or A minus C sub i curve, PSII photochemical operating efficiency Phi sub two was determined by Chl fluorescence as one minus F sub s divided by F sub m prime, where F sub s is the steady-state fluores- cence and F sub m prime is the maximum fluorescence as revealed using the single flash of approximately eighty-five hundred micromole per meter squared per second for a duration of one point zero seconds. We did not use the multiphase method to determine F sub m prime because all measurements were undertaken at low irradiances.

Leaf spots used for measurements were punched out, and leaf discs were measured for light absorption, STS-VIS miniature spectrometer; Ocean Optics, Dunedin, Florida, United States, twice per disc, to represent average absorption at this spot. After measuring their areas, leaf discs were dried in a seventy degree Celsius oven for twenty-four hours to determine dry matter. Each dry leaf disc was then ground into powder, and samples of one to three milligrams were analyzed for nitrogen concentrations with an EA one thousand one hundred eight CHN-O Element Analyzer, Fisons Instruments, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States using the Dumas combustion method.


## Data and modelling analyses

All the leaf spots had a similar nitrogen content. The average leaf nitrogen was one point six grams per meter squared and average leaf absorptance was eighty-five percent. Variation among replications was small, and replicate average values were used for analysis.

Deleted.

Begin array two five, one five, two five, three zero, three five. Data of A versus I sub absorbance were inspected to identify the irradiance at the Kok transition point, I sub absorbance sub U, based on the highest average r squared of linear regression on points both below and above the candidate I sub absorbance sub t of each curve. The regression slopes below and above I sub absorbance sub t were denoted as b sub one and b sub two, respectively, and the b sub one to b sub two ratio was calculated. The intercept of the regression after I sub absorbance is the day respiration estimated by the Kok method. Here, the intercepts of regression lines before and after I sub absorbance sub t are denoted as r sub d one and r sub d two, respectively. According to the original interpretation of the Kok effect, r sub d one is equivalent to the respiration rate in the darkness,

R sub d k. To examine if the decrease of phi sub two with increasing I sub absorbance could partly explain the Kok effect, plots of A versus I sub absorbance P two were made. To be compared with the A minus I sub absorbance plots, data points were allocated according to I sub absorbance sub t identified earlier, and linear regression slopes both below and above I sub absorbance sub t were denoted as B sub one and B sub two, respectively. Any decrease in the B sub one to B sub two ratio, relative to the b sub one to b sub two ratio, would suggest that the decrease of phi with increasing I sub absorbance could partly explain the Kok effect. The intercept of the linear plot of A versus I sub two b c phi sub two divided by four after the Kok break point is the day respiration estimated by the Yin method. As the intercept remains unchanged if the linear plot is made here for A versus I sub absorbance power phi sub two, the intercepts of A minus I sub absorbance phi sub two lines before and after I sub absorbance sub t are denoted as R sub D one and R sub D two, respectively.

To assess the impact of Gamma star over C sub C on the Kok effect, C sub C has to be known. To that end, we estimated G sub M using all data from combined gas exchange and Chl fluorescence measurements. G sub M is known to vary with temperature, but whether G sub M varies with widehat C sub i or widehat I sub inc or O sub two is uncertain. Furthermore, recent literature suggests the necessity to dissect mesophyll resistance into its components and to consider the intracellular arrangements of organelles. Here we consider three G sub M modes: mode i assumes that G sub M varies only with temperature, but not with either C sub i or I sub inc or O sub two; mode ii assumes that G sub M varies with all these factors; and mode iii is similar to mode ii but uses an additional factor m that lumps subresistance proportions and several intracellular properties of mesophyll organelles. For mode i, we estimated G sub M by fitting, the NRH-A method based on the non-rectangular hyperbolic equation for CO2-assimilation, described by Yin and Struik to all data (including A-C; curves). Like photosynthetic rate, G sub M has generally an optimum response to temperature, and we assumed that this response followed a normal distribution function, with an optimum temperature of thirty degrees Celsius: G sub M equals G sub M thirty exp left brace negative left bracket left parenthesis T minus thirty right parenthesis over Omega right bracket squared right brace, which has a minimum number of parameters to estimate. We incorporated these relationships into the NRH-A method to fit parameter Omega. For modes ii and iii, we used an equation described by Yin et al., G sub M equals delta left parenthesis A plus R sub d right parenthesis over left parenthesis C sub c minus Gamma star right parenthesis, which can semi-empirically accommodate the response (if observed) of G sub M to I sub inc, C sub i, O sub two, and temperature. Here, it is the unitless coefficient delta that is an explicit parameter to be estimated, and delta represents the carboxylation resistance to mesophyll resistance ratio. For each mode, the simultaneously estimated parameters together with G sub M or delta were: the calibration factor(s) that converts Chl fluorescencebased PSII photochemical efficiency left parenthesis Phi sub II right parenthesis into linear electron transport rate slash J equals s I sub inc Phi sub II; and Rubisco specificity at twenty-five degrees Celsius left parenthesis S sub c slash zero twenty-five right parenthesis. The values of S sub c slash c for other temperatures were calculated from the relation Gamma star equals zero point five O over S sub c l sub O (where O is the concentration of oxygen) and the Arrhenius equation using twenty-four thousand four hundred sixty J mol to the negative one of Bernacchi et al. as the activation energy for Gamma star (using other activation-energy estimates had little impact on our calculated Gamma star to C sub c ratios). In view of the reasoning of Farquhar and Busch, we used R sub D one of each curve as input for the R a term of the model in fitting. The fitting procedures for three modes were implemented using the GAUSS method in PROC NLIN of SAS, and the SAS codes can be obtained upon request. The SAS output gave the fitted A for each measurement point, with which C sub c was then solved from the model of Farquhar et al. as:

C sub c equals Gamma star left bracket J over four plus two left parenthesis A plus R sub d right parenthesis right bracket over left bracket J over four minus left parenthesis A plus R sub d right parenthesis right bracket. Results


## Forms of light inhibition of R sub d in relation to the Kok effect

We consider all possible scenarios in interpreting the often-said progressive inhibition of respiration by light, and examine, based on Equation one, the consequence of these scenarios on the shape of A against I sub ab curves within a range of the low irradiances.

The scenario 'continuously linear decrease' of R sub d with light did not at all result in a break in the linear relationship. Only two 'bilinear' scenarios can generate the Kok effect with an abrupt transition point. The 'continuously m to the negative two s to the negative one; R sub d text and A, micromol m to the negative two s to the negative one. New Phytologist twenty twenty two twenty-seven: seventeen sixty-four to seventeen seventy-five.

decelerating decrease' scenario also generated the Kok effect but without the abrupt break point. For an 'accelerating decrease' scenario, R sub d was also progressively suppressed by light, but this scenario generated an A-Labs curve where the slope did not decrease but increased, thereby being unable to reproduce the Kok curve. Finally, an 'abrupt suppression' scenario cannot be ruled out, but this scenario generated two linear discontinued segments with the same slope, thereby being unable to reproduce the Kok effect either.

As illustrated, the difference in scenarios also has implications for the estimation of Phi sub C O two. Only in the second 'bilinear' scenario and the abrupt-suppression scenario can Phi sub C O two be reliably estimated by the Kok method as the slope of the A minus I sub abs curve above the break point. For other scenarios, the slope represents the combined yield of photosynthesis and of the component of light suppression of R sub four. In fact, it is the scenario of Fig. three-c that the Kok method relies on to estimate R sub d and

Phi sub C O two. The observed Kok effect across various O sub two and C O sub two concentrations and various temperatures

Linear plots of A versus I sub abs using our experimental data identified the Kok break point in each curve. The maximum values of the slope below (phase one, b sub one) and above the break point (phase two, b sub two) were achieved at two percent O two, and were zero point zero nine five and zero point zero nine zero mol mol inverse, respectively, similar to experimentally measured or theoretically inferred Phi sub C O two for C sub three species under nonphotorespiratory conditions. A change in the slope from phase one to phase two became more significant with increasing O two concentrations, with decreasing C O two concentrations, and with increasing temperature. The b sub one to b sub two ratio increased from one point zero six at two percent O two to one point six nine at fifty percent O sub two, from one point zero seven at seven hundred micromol mol inverse C O two to one point eight three at one hundred micromol mol inverse C O two, and from one point one zero at fifteen degrees Celsius to greater than one point three zero at thirty to thirty-five degrees Celsius.

Similarly, the difference in the estimated respiration for phase one and phase two, denoted as r sub d one and r sub d two, respectively, became more significant with increasing O sub two concentrations, decreasing C O two concentrations, and increasing temperature. With the estimated b sub one, b two, r sub d one and r sub d two, the irradiance for the Kok break point, I sub abs, t can be calculated, and it varied from seven to


## The variable Phi sub two as a possible cause for the Kok effect

As with previous reports, Phi decreased with increasing irradiances in all three sets of measurements. Compared with the A versus I sub a l plots, the A versus I sub a b s P two plots had a similar shape (thus, they are not shown), but the obtained B sub one to B sub two ratios were slightly lower than the b sub one to b sub two ratios. As expected, the regression of A against I sub a b s P two yielded consistently lower intercepts, and therefore higher estimates, R sub D one and R sub D two, compared with r sub d one and r sub d two, respectively, confirming the results of earlier studies. For the same reason, the R sub D one to R sub D two ratios were smaller than the r sub d one to r sub d two ratios. There were no consistent trends for absolute values of r sub d one, r sub d two, R sub D one and R sub D two with changing O two or CO two concentrations; but unsurprisingly they increased consistently with increasing temperature.


## Association of the Kok effect with the variable

Gamma star divided by C sub c. We estimated parameter values of the aforementioned three g sub m modes. The estimate of the m factor for mode three was zero, which means that modes two and three had identical results. To test whether a nonzero m factor influenced the calculated C sub c, we fixed m to zero point three, our recent estimate of this parameter. The three g sub n modes yielded the same goodness of fit with R squared of zero point nine six six. The modeled A by the three modes did not differ essentially. Using the modeled A, we calculated the Gamma star divided by C sub c ratio across irradiance of all the three sets of measurements. The Gamma star divided by C sub c ratios calculated by mode two or three at first very low irradiances were more variable than those given by mode one, but the average Gamma star divided by C sub c ratio along a given A minus I sub i n c curve did not differ much between the three modes. We also used the variable J method of Harley et al to inspect any variation of g sub m and found no evidence g sub m with either C sub i or with I sub i n c or with O two. In the following analysis, we show the results based on the estimate using mode one, as they did not differ much from those using mode two or three.

The obtained average Gamma star divided by C sub c ratio varied from zero point zero zero eight to zero point one nine five when O two varied from two percent to fifty percent, from zero point three two two to zero point zero four nine when CO two varied from one hundred to seven hundred micromol per mol, and from zero point zero six six to zero point one one zero when temperature varied from fifteen to thirty-five degrees Celsius. Plotting the b sub one to b sub two ratio or the B sub one to B sub two ratio against the Gamma star divided by C sub c ratio showed linear relationships, and because these linear relations did not differ significantly among the three sets of measurements, the common regression line was obtained, and the intercept of the line at the zero Gamma star divided by C sub c ratio was close to one.


## The extents to which the Kok effect was explained by variable Phi sub two and

Gamma star over C sub c. The strong correlation of the b one to b two or B one to B two ratio with the Gamma star over C sub c ratio (with R squared greater than zero point eight zero Figure five A) does not mean that the varying Gamma star over C sub c ratio can explain more than eighty percent of the Kok effect because other factors such as R sub d and f sub acv may vary with Gamma star over C sub c as well. However, the relative difference in the slope value between the b one to b two versus the Gamma star over C sub c plot (two point five five nine, Figure five A) and the B one to B two versus the

The slope values have a unit of mol mol to the negative one and standard errors of the estimates are given in brackets; data used for estimation were from the three sets of measurements as described in Table one.

Cc plot (two point two six two; Figure five A) should quantify the contribution of the decreasing Phi two in explaining the Kok effect. This relative difference was left parenthesis two point five five nine minus two point two two six right parenthesis divided by two point five five nine times one hundred percent equals eleven point six percent, suggesting that, overall, the varying P two explained approximately twelve percent of the Kok effect across varying O two and CO two concentrations and varying temperatures.

We plotted the modelled A against I sub abs to generate slope values of b one and sixty-two, and thereby the modelled b one to b two ratios. The modelled b one to b two ratios did increase with the Gamma star over C sub c ratio (Figure five B), in line with the statement of Farquhar and Busch twenty seventeen that the changing Gamma star over C sub c ratio explains much of the observed Kok effect.

A versus I subscript a b s Phi subscript two plot divided by B subscript one

Farquhar and Busch did not estimate quantitatively the extent of the explanation.

The modelled B subscript one to B subscript two ratios were lower than the observed B subscript one to B subscript two ratios shown in Table two. Our prediction used measured C subscript I and Phi subscript two as input and took the effect of G subscript M and Gamma superscript star into account, and therefore the effects of varying Phi subscript two and Gamma superscript star divided by C subscript C were already considered in the modelling. This suggests that the plot of the modelled B subscript one to B subscript two ratios versus the Gamma superscript star divided by C subscript C ratios should reflect the combined effect of both varying Phi subscript two and varying Gamma superscript star divided by C subscript C. The intercept of the plot for the modelled B subscript one to B subscript two ratios versus the Gamma superscript star divided by C subscript C ratios was again close to one; but its slope was zero point nine four four (Figure five b), much lower than two point five five nine - the slope of the observed B subscript one to B subscript two ratios versus the Gamma superscript star divided by C subscript C ratios (Figure five a). As the intercept remained unaltered, this indicates that the combined contribution of varying Phi subscript two and Gamma superscript star divided by C subscript C to the observed Kok effect can be estimated from slope values, that is, circa thirty-six point nine percent. Therefore, the effect of varying Gamma superscript star divided by C subscript C alone explained circa twenty-five point three percent (thirty-six point nine minus eleven point six percent) of the observed Kok effect across various O subscript two and C O subscript two concentrations and various temperatures.


## Quantifying the maximum extent of inhibition of day respiration by light

Our modelling procedure aimed to quantify the contribution of Phi subscript two and varying Gamma superscript star divided by C subscript C, and therefore, as is the usual case, assumed that R subscript D and F subscript A C T did not vary with irradiance or with measurement O subscript two and C O subscript two conditions. The remaining unexplained contributions (circa sixty-three percent) must be a result of light inhibition of R subscript D and possibly variable F subscript A E T and/or rho subscript two. We are not able to separate the contribution of light inhibition of R subscript four from the effect of variable F subscript A C T and/or rho subscript two if the variation of F subscript A C T and/or rho subscript two with irradiance cannot be ruled out. If we assume that the variation of either F subscript A C T and/or rho subscript two with irradiance is negligible with the limiting light range, as is often assumed in measuring Phi subscript C O two, we can quantify the real inhibition of R subscript D by light by removing the effect of changing Phi subscript two and Gamma superscript star divided by C subscript C, as described in the following. As such, this estimate should be considered as the maximum real inhibition of R subscript one by light.


## The apparent relative inhibition in case of the Yin method is:

Inhibition subscript apparent left parenthesis percent right parenthesis equals R subscript D one measured minus R subscript D two measured divided by R subscript D one measured times one hundred, Equation four. The similar apparent relative inhibition can be proposed for the Kok method. The apparent inhibition was higher according to the Kok method than according to the Yin method (Figure six a), owing to the fact that the Kok method ignores the decrease of Phi subscript two with irradiance. Overall, the Kok method overestimated the apparent inhibition of R by circa eighteen percent, as compared with the Yin method.

Plotting the modelled A against I sub a b s resulted in lower estimates of r sub d two than r sub d one and plotting the modelled A against I sub a b Phi sub two also resulted in lower estimates of R sub D two than R sub D one than their respective estimates using the observed A, although a single value of R sub d was used for each curve in modelling. This confirmed the analysis that the apparent inhibition of R sub four by light was partly a result of the artefact of changing Gamma star over C sub c with irradiance. The real relative inhibition of R sub d by light can be calculated as:

Inhibition sub real left parenthesis percent right parenthesis equals the fraction of left parenthesis R sub D one measured minus R sub D two measured right parenthesis minus left parenthesis R sub D one modelled minus R sub D two modelled right parenthesis over R sub D one measured times one hundred. Equation five

Compared with the relative apparent inhibition from the Yin method, the relative real inhibition was much lower. The results also suggested that after correcting for varying Gamma star over C sub c light inhibition of R sub d only became lower but did not disappear: the real inhibition increased generally with relative amounts of photorespiration.


## Discussion

The 'linear decrease' of R sub d with light cannot generate the Kok effect

The Kok effect was initially, and is still often, hypothesized to arise from the suppression of respiration by light. This hypothesis has received support from studies that have identified several mechanisms for the metabolic down-regulation of respiratory reactions by light, as reviewed by y equals x. Gas exchange measurements have shown that R sub d, relative to R sub d k progressively decreased with increasing I sub a b s, either in a continuously linear manner or in a decelerating manner. Using Equations one through three, we assessed the effect of all possible scenarios for the often-said 'progressive' inhibition of respiration by light on the shape of A minus I sub a b s curves. Of the six scenarios considered, only the three scenarios for 'decelerating decrease' of R sub d with irradiance can generate the Kok effect, thereby excluding the other three scenarios that are often considered relevant to the Kok effect. In particular, the scenario of a 'continuously linear decrease' R sub d light did not result in a break in the linear A minus I sub a b s relationship. This is in contrast to the statement in their report for the eighteenth New Phytologist Workshop that 'the widely-accepted (historical) origin of the Kok effect is the inhibition of respiratory metabolism by light (linear decrease of R sub d with light)'. Given the consequences of the various scenarios on the Kok effect, and thus also on the estimation of Phi sub C O two, future studies should aim to reveal which of the three scenarios in Fig. three, B through D, is most likely for the light inhibition of

R sub dee. Several mechanisms co-contribute to the Kok effect

Our analyses suggest that not a single mechanism determines the Kok effect, but at least three mechanisms, that is, decreasing capital phi sub two with irradiance, varying capital gamma superscript star over C sub C, and light inhibition of R sub dee, co-contribute to it. Using a model, we quantitatively estimated the relative contribution of the carbon dioxide-specific processes like refixation, reflected via left capital gamma superscript star over C sub C right, versus the light-dependent decrease in photochemical efficiency left capital phi sub two right in explaining the Kok effect. Our result suggested that varying capital gamma superscript star over C sub C explained circa twenty-five percent of the Kok effect, while variable capital phi cannot be ignored and explained circa twelve percent of the Kok effect, across various carbon dioxide, oxygen, and temperature conditions. The appreciable contribution of variable capital phi sub two is supported by decreases in the slope of phase two, compared with Phase one, of the A minus I sub abs plots under conditions where photorespiration is greatly suppressed, for example, for C three species under low-oxygen conditions or for C four species.

However, there are still small decreases in the slope of phase two for C three species under low-oxygen conditions or for C four species when A was plotted against I sub abs capital phi sub two. This effect in C four species may reflect the low efficacy of the carbon dioxide-concentrating mechanism, abbreviated C C M, caused by a high leakiness at low irradiances. However, for a C three species, Buckley et al. observed even more significant changes for developing leaves under two percent than under twenty-one percent oxygen conditions, suggesting an involvement of other mechanisms. A fourth mechanism was shown here to potentially contribute to the Kok effect, but we were not able to verify it, as any variable f sub act and or rho sub two are hard to identify at the light intensities showing the Kok effect. Our results, that B one to B two ratios, Table two,

and R sub D one to R sub D two ratios, Table three, were very close to one at two percent oxygen or seven hundred micromole per mole carbon dioxide suggest that significant involvement of a fourth mechanism was highly unlikely. Thus, our remaining unexplained part, circa sixty-three percent of the Kok effect, is most likely a result of the light suppression of R sub dee, in agreement with the statement of Buckley et al. on the dominant role of this third mechanism.


## A dual effect of photorespiration in contributing to the Kok effect

Our strong linear relationships between the B one to B two ratio and the capital gamma superscript star over C sub C ratio, Fig. five a, confirmed previous results in the literature showing that the Kok effect was strongly associated with the occurrence of photorespiration. Perhaps it is because of the significant contribution of varying capital gamma superscript star over C sub C that the Kok effect reported in the earlier days, generally had sharper transition than the recent data because C sub a has been increasing over years. However, the contribution of other factors as discussed earlier means that the Kok effect will never disappear in the future high-carbon dioxide atmosphere; instead, it will continue, but to a lesser extent.

Our modelling analysis suggests that strong associations between the B one to B two ratio and the capital gamma superscript star over C sub C ratio shown in Fig. five a are the combined result of a dual effect of photorespiration in contributing to the Kok effect. The first-type effect is what Farquhar and Busch discussed on the role of increasing capital gamma superscript star over C sub C with irradiance in explaining the Kok effect, as a result of regulation of g sub S and g sub M. The second-type effect is what we found here - the light inhibition of R sub dee identified after removing the first-type effect was still positively correlated with capital gamma superscript star over C sub C, Fig. seven. Our results suggest that the second-type effect, representing real biological inhibitions, probably contributed more to the Kok effect than the first-type effect.

Farquhar and Busch demonstrated that the first-type effect of photorespiration on the Kok effect can generate the apparent light inhibition of R sub D for photorespiratory conditions. As stated in the introduction, this inhibition via regulation of g sub S and g sub M is the same as the importance that Loreto et al. emphasized for accounting for the refixation of respired carbon dioxide when estimating R sub D. Loreto et al. stated that there would be no significant difference between R sub four and R sub DK if the refixation of respiratory carbon dioxide during illumination is taken into account. Our results showing that, after correcting for varying Gamma star over C sub C, light inhibition of R sub D only became lower but did not disappear, do not agree with the conclusion of Loreto et al. The refixation is an important means to reduce the (photo)respiratory loss under photorespiratory conditions, but its net contribution to total photosynthesis should be negligible under nonphotorespiratory conditions. Berghuijs et al. showed that R sub D estimated by the Kok method was closer to the estimate made by their model (that accounted for the refixation) under nonphotorespiratory than under photorespiratory conditions. The experiment of Loreto et al. was conducted with maize, a C four species where Rubisco is expected to be surrounded by a high carbon dioxide partial pressure as a result of the C four carbon-concentrating mechanism, and thus the refixation of carbon dioxide released from respiration and photorespiration should have little contribution to the total assimilation. Using carbon fourteen-labelling, Pärnik and Keerberg showed that light inhibition of R sub D occurs even when accounting for carbon dioxide refixation. Gong et al. reported a high suppression of R sub zero by light in a C four species. If refixation does occur appreciably in C four species as Loreto et al. stated, it may reflect the refixation more by phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase than by Rubisco, which might contribute to leakiness.


## Apparent versus real light inhibition of

R sub D The suppression of R sub D by light has been identified using the Kok method, in many experimental studies, including recent reports based on carbon dioxide-exchange measurements or both carbon dioxide and oxygen-exchange measurements. Light is known to suppress the activity of enzymes that involve carbon dioxide-releasing pathways contributing to R sub D. Using the model analysis, Farquhar and Busch demonstrated that at least part of the light inhibition of R sub D can be generated without assuming this inhibition beforehand. Here we used the modelling approach to analyse combined carbon dioxide-exchange and chlorophyll fluorescence data. With such combined experimental and modelling analyses, we demonstrated quantitatively that the original Kok method that attributes the Kok effect entirely to the light inhibition of R sub D overestimated the real inhibition, as a result of ignoring the contribution of varying Phi sub two and Gamma star over C sub C to the Kok effect. The effect of varying Phi sub two on the Kok method in overestimating the inhibition has been corrected simply by the Yin method, while the correction for varying Gamma star over C sub C is more complicated. We previously stressed that both Kok and Yin methods to estimate R sub D actually apply to nonphotorespiratory conditions. Our analysis with Equation five suggests an approach to estimate the real light suppression of R sub D for photorespiratory conditions, although we are unable to clarify which one of the three scenarios of suppression is most likely. Most importantly, our analysis using Equation five revealed that the real suppression still increased with relative amounts of photorespiration. While this new empirical trend receives the support from a theoretical analysis of Buckley and Adams that photorespiratory NADH may be involved in the suppression, there are probably other underlying biochemical mechanisms that merit further investigation.