## Catalytic graphitization assisted synthesis of iron carbide, iron, graphitic carbon with advanced pseudocapacitance

We report an environmentally friendly strategy for the synthesis of iron carbide, iron, graphitic carbon based on hydrothermal carbonization and graphitization of carbon spheres with potassium ferrate at eight hundred degrees Celsius. The obtained sample consisting of iron carbide, iron nanoparticles and graphitic carbon delivered an enhanced pseudocapacitance of four hundred twenty-eight point zero farad per gram at a current density of one amp per gram. After removal of the iron carbide, iron electroactive materials, the graphitic carbon possessed a large specific surface area up to two thousand eight hundred thirteen point six meters squared per gram with a capacity of two hundred forty-three point three farad per gram at one amp per gram, far outweighing the other amorphous carbon electrodes of carbon spheres annealed at eight hundred degrees Celsius without the treatment of potassium ferrate. The graphitic material with a porous structure could offer more electroactive sites and improved conductivity of the sample. This method provided guidelines for the synthesis of superior performance supercapacitors with synchronous graphitic carbon and electroactive species.


## One. Introduction

The ever-increasing demand for energy all over the world has promoted intensive research in the field of energy storage materials. Among various types of emerging power devices, supercapacitors owing to their excellent output capability, quick charge-discharge rate and long cycle stability have attracted much attention of researchers.

Carbon-based materials, such as activated carbon and graphene, have been regarded as the most common electrode materials. The hydrothermal carbonization technique is a green and soft chemistry method to synthesize carbon-based materials under mild temperature and self-generated pressure. The whole process involved a series of reactions, such as hydrolysis, dehydration, polymerization and aromatization, leading to the formation of brown hydrochar and soluble chemicals. Biomass-derived carbon materials are low-cost and have been reported as good candidates for carbon-based electrodes.

The properties of specific surface area, porosity and conductivity of these materials have a big influence on their performance of electrochemistry. As we all know, the larger specific surface area value is favorable to obtaining electrode material with excellent performance. Till now, various strategies have been proposed to develop porous structure, including carbonization under potassium hydroxide, zinc chloride and carbon dioxide. Despite the remarkable increase in the specific surface area value and pore size after activation, most materials display unsatisfied specific capacitance because of the low conductivity. Creating graphitic carbon leading to lower internal resistance is a possible method to solve the problem. Generally, the conventional graphitization transformation requires rigorous conditions, like high temperature greater than one thousand degrees Celsius or high vacuum degree, which does not only need a huge energy input but also leads to a decreased porosity of the host. However, using transition metal such as iron, cobalt or nickel functioned as a catalyst during the pyrolysis process could achieve graphitization transformation at low temperature. Metal organic frameworks, as a kind of porous coordination polymers, are promising materials in the field of supercapacitor and battery. Pang et al. studied a series of metal organic framework composite as excellent electrochemical energy storage material, such as nickel thiophene dash two comma five dash dicarboxylate bipyridine metal organic framework nanocrystals, cobalt oxide nanocube at cobalt metal organic framework. In some cases, the derived species could serve as electroactive species as well and can be used to prepare supercapacitors with high performance. For example, Li et al. fabricated carbon hybrids by graphitic carbon nitride and iron oxalate as electrode, which delivered an enhanced pseudocapacitance. In this process, iron oxalate was further reduced to metallic iron followed by carbide reaction. Iron based nanomaterials, such as encapsulated iron phosphide nanoparticles with graphene, nano iron dash carbon three with in situ grown carbon nanotube on nitrogen doped hollow carbon cube, nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes grafted onto metal organic framework derived carbon nanomaterials were proved to display efficient electrochemical performance. Beta iron oxyhydroxide at carbon derived multi-shelled ferric oxide microspheres by calcination in air could deliver a high capacity up to six hundred thirty farad per gram at one amp per gram.

Herein, we achieved a safe and environmentally friendly transformation from amorphous carbon spheres to graphitic carbon layers with iron carbide, iron nanoparticles through potassium ferrate named as FC-One-Eight, which showed excellent pseudocapacitance as the electrode for supercapacitors. Potassium ferrate, in this article, is not only used as the activating agent but also functioned as the precursor of catalyst iron in the graphitic transformation process. The derived iron carbide, iron nanoparticles serve as electroactive species as well and compared with the other amorphous carbon electrodes of FC-Zero-Eight, the potassium ferrate-derived iron carbide, iron, graphitic carbon exhibited an outstanding pseudocapacitance of four hundred twenty-eight point zero farad per gram at one amp per gram working as an electrode material for supercapacitors. After removal of the iron carbide, iron electroactive materials, the graphitic carbon with a much high specific surface area up to two thousand eight hundred thirteen point six meters squared per gram displayed a capacity of two times higher than that of the other type of amorphous carbon electrode, FC-Zero-Eight. Iron carbide, iron, graphitic carbon exhibited synchronous performance of graphitic carbon and electroactive species, which was inspirational and provided a novel route to design electrode material.


## Two. Experimental

Two point one. Materials

Glucose, C six H twelve O six, AR was purchased from Aladdin Reagent Inc. Potassium ferrate greater than ninety-eight percent was obtained from Beijing Innochem Chemical Company, Limited. All the chemicals were used as received without further purification.


## Two point two. Hydrothermal synthesis of carbon spheres

The carbon spheres were synthesized using glucose as a precursor through hydrothermal carbonization. In a typical procedure, a certain concentration of glucose was transferred to a Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave one hundred milliliters, followed by heating at one hundred forty to two hundred degrees Celsius for ten hours before being naturally cooled to room temperature. The precipitates were isolated by centrifugation and rinsed sequentially with deionized water and ethanol, and dried in an oven at sixty degrees Celsius overnight. Several kinds of parameters were investigated and the details were displayed in Table one. The samples were named as Gx dash T dash t, where X is the concentration of glucose, T is the hydrothermal temperature, t is the reaction time. For example, G one dash two hundred dash ten means one molar glucose was hydrothermally treated at two hundred degrees Celsius for ten hours.


## Two point three. Carbonization and activation of carbon spheres

Zero point five grams carbon spheres were mixed with potassium ferrate powder in the mass ratio of one to zero and one to one in deionized water eighty milliliters stirring for eight hours. The mixture was dried in an oven overnight at one hundred degrees Celsius followed by annealed in argon atmosphere under eight hundred degrees Celsius at a heating rate of five degrees Celsius per minute for two hours. The as-obtained samples were diluted with deionized water until pH reached seven and dried at eighty degrees Celsius. The samples were denoted as FC-zero-eight and FC-one-eight. The yield of FC-one-eight was almost fifty-two point five percent. For comparison, FC-one-eight-HCl was prepared by etching FC-one-eight with concentrated HCl and washed with deionized water to neutrality and dried at eighty degrees Celsius.


## Two point four Characterizations

The main text of the article should appear here with headings as appropriate. A series of measurements were conducted to determine the structure of the products. The crystal structure was determined by powder X-ray diffraction with a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer equipped with copper Ka radiation at a wavelength equals zero point one five four zero six nanometers at forty kV and forty mA were recorded in the range of twenty equals ten to seventy. The morphological morphology was measured using a scanning electron microscope at five kV and a transmission electron microscope operating at two hundred kV. Raman spectra were recorded from one thousand to two thousand five hundred per centimeter on a microscopic confocal Raman spectrometer using a five hundred thirty-two nanometer YAG solid-state laser. The chemical composition of the sample was verified by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis was conducted by five hundred micrometer beam spot of an Escalab two hundred fifty X i electron spectrometer from Thermo Scientific Ltd, aluminum Ka was used as the monoenergetic X-ray source, and the energy step size was set at zero point zero five zero electron volt. The Brunauer-Emmett-Teller surface area was determined by a nitrogen adsorption method using an automated surface area and pore-size analyzer. The pore size distribution was calculated according to a quenched solid density functional theory theory.


## Two point five Electrochemical tests

The electrochemical properties were measured by a three-electrode system with a platinum foil as counter electrode and mercury oxide electrode as the reference electrode. A six molar potassium hydroxide aqueous solution was used as the electrolyte. The working electrode was prepared by mixing active materials, carbon black and PTFE at a weight ratio of eight to one to one in ethanol solvent. The slurry was mixed by ultrasonication for two hours and then loaded on graphite paper followed by vacuum drying at seventy degrees Celsius for twenty-four hours.

The cyclic voltammetry and galvanostatic charge-discharge curves were performed on an electrochemical workstation at a voltage range from negative one point two to negative zero point three volts. The specific capacitance C was obtained from cyclic voltammetry curves using the following relationship:

C equals I times delta t over m times delta V. One.

where I is the discharge current in amperes, m is the active material mass of the working electrode in grams, delta V is the window voltage in volts, and delta t is the discharge time in seconds.

The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was carried out on an electrochemical workstation at an open circuit potential and a frequency range from ten to ten to the power of five hertz. Three. Results and discussion


## Three point one. Formation of carbon spheres

The brown powder synthesized through hydrothermal carbonization of glucose are spherical particles. It is worth noting that the formation of carbon spheres is influenced by hydrothermal temperature, reaction time and the concentration of glucose. SEM observations indicated that when the hydrothermal temperature decreased from two hundred degrees Celsius to one hundred eighty degrees Celsius, the diameter of carbon spheres showed a decreased trend. Moreover, the particle size distributions demonstrated that the particle sizes of G one dash two hundred dash ten and G one dash one eighty dash ten were four hundred ninety nanometers and two hundred thirty-five nanometers accounted for a large percentage. Lower hydrothermal temperature would lead to the formation of smaller carbon spheres. By adjusting the parameters of the synthesis process, we could obtain carbon spheres with the calculated average particle diameter of around one hundred ninety nanometers. However, no solid product of carbon spheres were formed except brown solutions in the case of lower hydrothermal temperature one hundred forty degrees Celsius even with a longer reaction time of twenty hours. The brown solution without the formation of carbon spheres suggested that aromatic compounds and oligosaccharides were formed in the "polymerization" step, while none of the nuclei was generated and to be continued growing. To investigate the graphitization transformation process better, carbon spheres with a diameter of around one hundred ninety nanometers were chosen as the precursor.


## Three point two. Graphitization process

The fabrication procedures of graphitic samples of FC-one-eight and FC-one-eight-HCl through K two FeO four activation and catalyst graphitization were illustrated in Figure one. Cheap and commercially available glucose was chosen as the carbon source to synthesize amorphous carbon spheres through hydrothermal carbonization. The as-obtained carbon spheres were then mixed with K two FeO four providing activation agent KOH and Fe OH three as eqn two.

Four K two FeO four plus ten H two O equals eight KOH plus four Fe OH three plus three O two. Two.

In this step, KOH would react with carbon spheres and develop pores on the surface of samples. The graphitization transformation is as follows: the Fe species are transformed to Fe three O four when annealed from four hundred degrees Celsius to six hundred degrees Celsius. In the case of seven hundred degrees Celsius, Fe three O four is converted to metallic Fe as a result of the reduction of amorphous carbon by H two or CO produced during the pyrolysis process and when the temperature is further increased to eight hundred degrees Celsius, graphitized carbon is formed under the catalysis of Fe. Apart from the existence of metallic Fe, a portion of Fe transforms into well-crystallized Fe three C. It was reported that the metallic Fe and pyrolytic carbon lead to the formation of Fe three C. Therefore, the results verified that the FC-one-eight sample was consisted of Fe three C/Fe and graphitic carbon. As displayed in Figure two a, the diffraction peaks locating at thirty-seven point six degrees, forty-two point nine degrees, forty-three point seven degrees and forty-five point nine degrees correspond to Fe three C with the standard PDF card of JCPDS number thirty-five dash zero seven seven two. Two diffraction peaks are detected at forty-four point six degrees and sixty-five point zero degrees, which belong to the one hundred ten and two hundred planes of Fe. Furthermore, carbon in the whole process was partly oxidized to CO/CO2 and carbonate and as a result, the porous structure was obtained. Obviously, graphitic carbon could be formed when annealed at the temperature of eight hundred degrees Celsius.

To investigate the function of K two FeO four, carbon spheres annealed without the treatment of K two FeO four FC-zero-eight were studied for comparison. From the XRD pattern in Figure two a, two relatively broad peaks were existed in the pattern of FC-zero-eight, implying that the dominant component of the above was amorphous carbon. Validated by the XRD pattern of FC-one-eight-HCl, Fe three C/Fe composites were removed successfully. According to the nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherms plotted in Figure two b, FC-one-eight-HCl showed four-type adsorption-desorption isotherm with H4-type hysteresis loop, indicating the presence of mesopores. The SSA of the obtained FC-zero-eight is four hundred seventy-nine point eight square meters per gram, while the chemical activation treatment with K two FeO four developed more pores making it increased to five hundred forty-five point five square meters per gram for FC-one-eight. FC-one-eight-HCl showed the largest SSA up to two thousand eight hundred thirteen point six square meters per gram, resulting from the pores caused by the removal of Fe three C/Fe nanoparticles. The pore size distribution in Figure two c revealed that the pore diameter of these samples was around three nanometers, suggesting these samples were rich in mesopores.

Raman spectra were conducted to characterize the graphitization degree. Typically, the band at one thousand three hundred fifty per centimeter, known as D-band, is assigned to defect sites or the disordered sp-two carbon. The G band at one thousand five hundred eighty per centimeter is corresponded to the in-plane vibrational mode of sp-two hybridized carbon. The intensity ratio of I subscript D over I subscript G values for FC-zero-eight, FC-one-eight and FC-one-eight-HCl are one point three zero, zero point nine nine and one point zero zero, respectively. Compared with FC-zero-eight, the lower I subscript D over I subscript G values of FC-one-eight and FC-one-eight-HCl indicated a relatively short-range order graphitic carbon because of the treatment of potassium ferrate. Furthermore, the X-ray photoelectron spectrum verified the existence of carbon, oxygen, and iron elements on the surface of FC-one-eight. The high-resolution spectra iron two P orbit showed two dominant peaks at seven hundred eleven point zero and seven hundred thirteen point one electron volts, which were indexed to the two P subscript three over two orbitals of iron two plus and iron three plus, respectively. The peaks located at a binding energy of seven hundred twenty-four point six electron volts, seven hundred twenty-six point four electron volts and seven hundred eighteen point five electron volts were assigned to iron two plus and iron three plus for the two P subscript one over two band, and a satellite.

To evaluate the surface morphology and structure of the samples, SEM measurements of FC-zero-eight, FC-one-eight and FC-one-eight-HCl were conducted. After annealed in argon atmosphere at eight hundred degrees Celsius, the as-prepared carbon spheres (FC-zero-eight) became black and maintained a similar structure and the carbon spheres interconnected forming the three D network, which was favorable to electron transfer. Besides, FC-one-eight and FC-one-eight-HCl generally inherited their structure except for the rough surface of carbon spheres. Furthermore, a comparison of SEM images revealed that the average diameter of the FC-one-eight-HCl sample was a little bit smaller than that of FC-one-eight after the removal of iron carbide or iron nanoparticles. Convinced by the particle size distributions, as measured by a statistical method measuring the diameter of one hundred particles, the average size of FC-one-eight decreased from approximately four hundred fifty nanometers to approximately two hundred forty nanometers after being etched by HCl.

The TEM images of FC-zero-eight presented disordered carbon lattice fringes, suggesting the existence of amorphous carbon. As shown, the HRTEM of FC-one-eight was composed of graphitic carbon and iron nanoparticles. The lattice fringe with a spacing of zero point three four nanometers corresponded to the zero zero two plane of carbon and the lattice fringe calculated to be zero point two zero nanometers and zero point two four nanometers were assigned to the one zero one plane of iron and one one one plane of iron carbide, respectively. Obviously, the existence of metallic iron contributed to the formation of graphitic carbon. The corresponding elemental mappings of carbon and iron further verified that the rough surface of carbon spheres should be iron carbide or iron nanoparticles. Part of FC-one-eight-HCl nanoparticles showed irregular structure while the HRTEM images confirmed the existence of graphitic carbon.

The whole process was economic and environmentally friendly without any toxic or hazardous materials input. FC-one-eight and FC-one-eight-HCl were expected to be excellent electrode materials. On the one hand, the partial graphitization with hierarchical porosity structure could offer large specific surface area value and electroactive sites. On the other hand, the graphitic carbon ensured conductivity of the sample.


## Three point three. Electrochemical performance

Electrochemical properties of the obtained carbon material were examined under a voltage window from negative one point two to negative zero point three volts at a scan rate of one hundred millivolts per second initially in a three-electrode configuration. As shown, the FC-one-eight electrode displayed a larger area than the other two samples, implying a larger capacitance value. A pair of explicit and symmetrical cathodic and anodic peaks can be observed in the CV curve of FC-one-eight, implying a kind of pseudocapacitive behavior. It was reported that iron carbide species can be oxidized to iron three oxide irreversibly in the potassium hydroxide electrolyte and result in the reversible redox reaction of the newly formed iron three oxide material as expressed by the following equation.

F e sub three O sub four plus four H sub two O plus two e superscript negative Rightarrow three F e left parenthesis O H right parenthesis sub two plus two O H.

Notably, the graphitic F C-one-eight-H C l displayed a much larger integral area than F C-zero-eight, which convincingly demonstrated excellent energy storage performance. In other words, carbon materials with higher graphitization degree exhibit superior Faraday capacitance. In detail, according to the G C D profiles,

the F C-one-eight and F C-one-eight-H C l electrodes can deliver the specific capacitance as high as four hundred twenty-eight point zero and two hundred forty-three point three F g superscript negative one at one A g superscript negative one, whereas the specific capacitance of F C-zero-eight are only eighty-four point three F g 1 at one A g 1. The capacitance value of F C-one-eight outperforms most reported Fe-based carbon materials in Table two.

The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy analysis was carried out to inspect the kinetic properties of these four samples in the range of zero point zero one Hertz to one hundred kilohertz, the results were delivered in Figure five c. It was found that low frequency part of the region was almost straight, implying the low diffusion resistance. In the high frequency part of the E I S plot, F C-one-eight and F C-one-eight-H C l display lower R sub c values than F C-zero-eight. It is reasonable that the improved electrochemical performance is related to the higher graphitic degree. The R sub c t values of zero point two one and zero point two two 92 for F C-one-eight and F C-one-eight-H C l were much lower than that of F C-zero-eight, zero point four one 92, implying the faster charge transfer at the electrode and electrolyte interface.

As consistent with the C V analysis, the graphitic electrodes of F C-one-eight and F C-one-eight-H C l showed a much longer discharge time than the other counterpart demonstrating higher specific capacitance (Figure S3 plus). The higher values in specific capacitance can be contributed to the improved conductivity of graphitic carbon, the larger S S A and the porous structure. The C V curves of F C-one-eight at multiple scan rates were accessed in Figure five d. C V curves displayed similar shape with the scan rate decreasing from one hundred to five millivolt per second (Figure five d). The reduction and oxidation peaks moved outwards as the increase of scan rates due to the polarization of the electrode. The details of galvanostatic charge/discharge curves were exhibited in Figure five e. Likewise, the galvanostatic charge-discharge curves showing voltage platforms are believed to the nature of pseudocapacitance. F C-zero-eight and F C-one-eight-H C l exhibited typical rectangular shape of C V curves and triangular G C D curves, demonstrating a double layer electric capacitive behavior (Figure S4 plus). The cycle stability was carried out by performing ten thousand times at five A g superscript negative one (Figure five f). F C-one-eight retained a moderate rate of fifty-one point seven percent compared with the initial capacitance and the inferior cycle stability of F C-one-eight was probably due to the irreversibly oxidized of Fe three C and Fe to Fe three O four in K O H electrolyte. The morphology of F C-one-eight and F C-one-eight-H C l samples after electrochemical activation were conducted to uncover the mechanism of electrochemical performance (Figure S5 plus). It was found that both samples presented spherical structure as before, while F C-one-eight sample showed a relatively smooth surface compared with the initial one. The absence of Fe three C and Fe species resulted in the inferior cycling performance.


## Four. Conclusions

In conclusion, we achieved the transformation from amorphous carbon spheres to graphitic carbon through hydrothermal carbonization, chemical activation and graphitization using K sub two F e O sub four. The obtained F C-one-eight with graphitic carbon and Fe three C and Fe structure are believed to be the promising electrode material. On the one hand, the embedded Fe three C and Fe NPs are contributed to the pseudocapacitance performance with a high specific capacitance of four hundred twenty-eight point zero F g superscript negative one at a discharge current density of one A g superscript negative one. On the other hand, the graphitic carbon could improve the conductivity. When removing Fe three C and Fe NPs, the graphitic carbon of F C-one-eight-

H C l with high specific surface area up to two thousand eight hundred thirteen point six square meters per gram exhibited a high specific capacitance of two hundred forty-three point three F g 1 at one A g 1.


## Author contributions

Conflicts of interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China.


## Notes and references

Paper