## EGPA twenty twenty-three - P S G twenty Welfare state governance and professionalism

Common path or continuing divergence in welfare state reform:

A longitudinal study of Norway and the Netherlands, nineteen ninety to twenty twenty


## Introduction

In recent decades, reforms in the welfare state and public services have been strongly influenced by New Public Management and New Public Governance. Increasing efficiency through private sector methods has been a strong driver behind many N P M-type reforms, and N P G ideas are reflected in intentions to make the administration more user-friendly, holistic, and cooperative. Although the type and character of reform differ per country, an important common setting was the policy shift to 'activation' since the nineteen nineties, implying a change in focus from well-being to work, with a reduction of social expenditure and more flexibility of the labour market as important objectives. 'Activation policies' often have been associated with shared governance characteristics, such as one-stop agencies, decentralisation, quasi-markets for service provision, reduced influence of social partners, performance management, and the individualisation of social interventions. Given the common premise of 'activation', convergence in developing similarities in structures and processes of welfare administrations can be expected after three decades. Nevertheless, national institutional contexts may influence reform trajectories and lead to a (re)confirmation of differences between states.

In this paper, we examine to what extent convergence and/or divergence occurs in reform of the welfare state administration, which we broadly define as administration and delivery of employment services, social services, and the benefit system. Unlike many studies with a shorter time horizon, we take a longitudinal, comparative approach, studying reforms in two countries over three decades. The paper takes the following questions as a starting point for discussion of the reforms: What are the relationships and tensions between N P M and N P G, and how do we see these models reflected in the reforms in two welfare administrations? Is there growing convergence or divergence in the reform process and in current systems, and how can these tendencies be explained? We first discuss how such questions are more generally addressed in literature on public sector reform. Then we examine the reform trajectories and their consequences for the present welfare administrations, in particular on two key themes: the relationship between central and decentralized governance (levels), and the role and position of key stakeholders (e.g. clients, social partners). We do this by examining two of the largest public sector reforms in Norway and the Netherlands. With the Norwegian Labour and Welfare Administration in Norway, two thousand six, and the Structure of the Administration of Work and Income, S U W I, in the Netherlands, two thousand two, both countries chose for a major change of their institutional framework for public welfare and employment services.

Next, we review literature on public sector reform to develop our analytical framework. We provide an overview of the methods and dataset as the basis of our empirical analysis. Our findings are presented in two steps: we analyse the reform paths in Norway and the Netherlands over the past three decades, and then compare their impact on the present welfare administrations. Finally, we draw the lessons from the reforms in the two countries, and relate our findings to theory on public sector reform.


## Theoretical context

Literature on public sector reform distinguishes alternative, ideal-type governance models, including: the traditional model of public administration, new public management and the new public governance, also called network governance.

The traditional model has been characterized by a strict hierarchy, with permanent and neutral civil servants, who implement public policies that are determined solely by politics. Top-down planning, central regulation and control, and a high level of professional expertise are main elements of the 'traditional model' that remained the most successful management model in the public sector for more than a century. Since the early nineteen eighties, many countries have moved away from some of its principles and aimed to replace traditional public administration for a rigid bureaucracy based on procedures rather than a focus on results. In the economic crisis of the nineteen seventies and eighties and an expanding welfare state, more efficiency and manageability were sought and alternative models have emerged.

The well-known alternative new public management model is a doctrine for a more efficient, cheaper public sector that is more responsive to its citizens, 'customers.' New public management imported business concepts, such as management targets for performance, output measurement, and contracts as main forms of coordination rather than hierarchical relationships. It combined a central role for management with disaggregated organizational forms, such as business units and executive organisations, and introduced market mechanisms such as competitive tenders and performance rankings. New public management has been very influential but showed huge variation and also received much criticism. Its emphasis on private sector methods has been contested and new public management is criticized for centralized decision making by public managers, rather than supporting decentralization in public organizations as it claims.

New public governance, as a post-new public management model, promotes horizontal coordination between government and non-state actors to enhance broader legitimacy, support and resources for policy and implementation. New public governance is often viewed a response to new public management shortcomings, but has its roots in older collaborative and network-based approaches. In new public governance, the pursuit of shared goals is central. Important elements are a holistic view of social problems, collaborative structures and joint leadership with cross-border skills. Klenk and Reiter reveal that "the post-new public management idea has been very influential as an 'ideational weapon' to indicate a crisis of the new public management model," but they question a (large) practical impact of the post-new public management ideas.

The origins of the three models have been situated as sequential in time, traditional public administration, new public management, new public governance, but empirical studies indicate that newer models are added to prior ones rather than replace them. The result of the subsequent reforms is then an increasing hybridization, where various governance principles are used at the same time. Studies of hybrid public organisations show that principles derived from alternative reform models are not automatically well aligned. Tensions have been identified between new public management and new public governance due to mutual incompatibility; in particular between simultaneous aims for competition and collaboration. The question of whether and how reform ideas based on alternative public management models can be successfully combined has not yet been answered. More empirical work, especially with a longitudinal and comparative view, is needed to understand the long-term trends.

Comparison of welfare state reforms raises the question of whether there are general patterns in terms of "convergence" or "divergence". While convergence implies the reforms are moving in the same direction, divergence means that they are moving apart. In this paper, divergence and convergence are terms used to describe the directional relationship of the reforms in the two welfare administrations and of the current delivery systems in the two countries. For a long time, the welfare state literature has largely concentrated on substantive policies rather than pathways of reform and administrative styles. In general, the public management literature has considered prominent patterns of transnational convergence toward New Public Management; though with different types and degrees in adopting New Public Management ideas in welfare administrations. These differences are usually subscribed to variation in the institutional context, e.g. between unitary and federal states; liberal and social-democratic political traditions. It has been suggested that differences in the way national labor markets are governed and in the role of social partners can be explained by institutional legacies and ideological preferences.

Different pathways are also noticed when it comes to how New Public Governance ideas for collaborative, integrated services have influenced reform. A large comparative study distinguishes two reform paths of welfare administrations in Europe: a comprehensive model where case management transcends various policy areas and where services and organizations are merged; and a second, more voluntary model of service integration with considerable freedom for local decisions and variation. The study points to the relevance of the institutional context to understand these differences, suggesting the first pathway requires a base of highly developed services and a strong public administration (e.g. Germany, Ireland, United Kingdom, and the Basque Country) while in the second type of reform, New Public Governance ideas are embedded in existing institutional frameworks with services less developed and constitutional barriers or limited capacity of public administration (e.g. France, Switzerland, Romania). Although neither Norway nor the Netherlands were part of the study, the authors suggest that Norway would fit the extended New Public Governance variant, while the Netherlands may represent the more voluntary model. So not only patterns of convergence are observed, but also those of significant divergence in reform of welfare administrations.

In this paper, we examine convergence and divergence in two welfare administrations and analyze how New Public Management and New Public Governance can be recognized in reforms over three decades. We compare reforms in two ways: in each country over time and between the two nations. Our longitudinal study evaluates the process and administrative consequences of the New Public Management and New Public Governance reforms that are controversial in theory and still little known in practice.


## Methods

Data for this paper are derived from key studies of both authors in analyzing welfare state reforms in their respective countries between nineteen ninety and twenty twenty.

The studies mainly use qualitative methods and are based on literature, interviews and documents. To illustrate, in a recent study of regional network governance in the Dutch welfare administration, thirty-seven group interviews with sixty-four managers, professionals and stakeholders were conducted. In Norway, we drew for recent data on the two thousand nineteen evaluation of the implementation of the white paper "NAV in a new era", involving interviews with employees and managers from frontline organizations and regional administrations (ninety-four persons in total). For our studies on welfare governance reform in both countries, we also extensively reviewed public documents, such as government proposals to parliament, reports from public committees, and monitoring and evaluation reports.

Our analytical approach draws on a narrative strategy, in which we sought to construct a detailed story as a way of obtaining an overall understanding of the reform processes in each country over three decades. We used the governance models as described in the theory section to gain an understanding of whether the reform trajectories reflect New Public Management and New Public Governance ideas. The following step in our data analysis was a cross-national comparison of reform ideas in different phases of the reforms and in the current welfare administrations, to identify convergence and/or divergence.

Next, we first analyze the major reforms over the past three decades in both countries and then compare their impact on the current welfare administrations.


## Growing convergence in reform paths

Since the nineteen nineties, remarkable changes can be mentioned in both countries. Although there lately is growing convergence in reform (since two thousand eight), significant divergence characterizes the earlier phases. The main shifts over three decades are shown in Table two.

We elaborate on the reform process below.


## Norway

In the nineteen nineties, before the NAV reform, the national insurance administration and the public employment service were separate hierarchies; the national insurance administration more a traditional public administration type organization, instructing the local national insurance administration offices, and the public employment service more a New Public Management governed administration.

Labor market programs were outsourced through a buyer-supplier model, in the expectation that this would allow for easy upscaling and downscaling of services, parallel to the economic situation. Tasks left with the public employment service were assessment and referral to programs. During the same period, efforts were made to transform sheltered workshops into vocational/reintegration service providers. Their services were increasingly subject to competition and tenders.

The NAV reform followed earlier incremental efforts to stimulate local cooperation between the national insurance administration, public employment service and the municipalities. These were hampered by bureaucratic boundaries at the national level, leading parliament to direct the government to propose reform. The first proposal contained only minor changes; it was rejected by parliament and sent back to government, where the new minister argued that a merger at the national level between public employment service and national insurance administration was necessary to achieve cooperation at the local level. So we see here incremental steps leading to an impasse, followed by political pressure for a more radical shift.

Characterizing the Norwegian reform trajectory since two thousand, Breit et al. identify three phases. The first phase, two thousand to two thousand seven, involves the establishment of the new NAV organization, and experimentation with integrated work forms. The NAV reform included a merger between the two state administrations for National Insurance and Labour Market and municipal welfare services in one-stop local agencies, and the PES moved from a buyer-supplier model to integration and some decentralisation. With its weight on horizontal coordination and autonomy at the local level, the NAV reform displayed traces of a New Public Governance paradigm that frontline managers during the reform process operationalised in a more integrated office.

In two thousand eight to two thousand fourteen, a broader reform followed to increase efficiency, for example by re-centralization of the national insurance administration, digital standardized work tools for client services and performance indicators and requirements regarding documentation. This second phase involved a rollback and a return to New Public Management ideas, an effort to turn the frontline offices into single-purpose organizations for employment services only (preferable to the most job-ready clients) by reducing the number of municipal services and the withdrawal of national insurance benefit case processing to regional administrative units. Additionally, the ministry and the NAV directorate governed the frontline offices through performance measures and efforts to standardize the organizational design and the work of the frontline offices. Unlike the Netherlands, rising unemployment did not lead to cutbacks but to higher budgets for labour market measures.

From two thousand fifteen, a third policy change breathed new life into the importance of professionalism in service provision. In many ways, the NAV returned to the original reform ideas of the early two thousands, underlining integrated services and local self-government in developing new forms of professionalism and experimentation at the street level. This phase included a return to New Public Governance ideas of horizontal coordination within and outside the NAV offices, and a greater focus on professionalism and clients with more complex issues, in need digitization of communication with clients, but depending on the local NAV manager. In recent years, the trend from two thousand fifteen has strengthened, but we also notice the merger of municipalities and NAV offices into much larger first-line organizations, which points to New Public Management ideas for efficiency at a decentralized level.

In sum, in Norway we see a move from a Traditional Public Administration or New Public Management based system in the nineteen nineties to New Public Governance in the early two thousands, followed by more emphasis on New Public Management at the end of two thousands and a revival of New Public Governance since two thousand fifteen. The current trend is reinforcing the New Public Governance reform but also a move towards more efficiency with municipal mergers and larger regional NAV agencies, argued to strengthen professionalization and specialization. The next section will show that the Dutch reform of the welfare administration ultimately has many parallels with the Norwegian one, but along a completely divergent route.


## Netherlands

Traditionally, and similar to Norway, there was a strong division between the welfare administration of social benefits, Public Employment Service, and social assistance. Social benefits in the Netherlands were executed by sectoral organizations governed by social partners; Public Employment Service was a central government department and social assistance the traditional domain of municipalities. The welfare system was increasingly criticized in the nineteen eighties for high unemployment and disability, and a low degree of activation. The Public Employment Service hierarchy increasingly came under fire for its inability to reverse this trend. After ten years of negotiations between government and social partners, this resulted in a radical reform for a new governance structure with central and regional three-party boards with equal seats for government, employers' associations, and unions. So we see here the idea of collaborative networks on a horizontal basis, in contrast with a principal-agent model for Public Employment Service in Norway in the nineteen nineties.

In two thousand two, the Dutch government implemented a much wider reform with the SUWI Act, encompassing a completely new organizational structure for both social benefits and the Public Employment Service. The SUWI reform came after endless negotiations since nineteen ninety-four for 'marketization' in the benefit administration that resulted in an impasse. Different from the NAV reform in Norway, SUWI was a typical combination of Traditional Public Administration and New Public Management, with a minor role for New Public Governance. A large national organization, UWV, was created from a merger of five sector organizations for the implementation of benefits, formerly led by social partners and now centrally managed by the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment (a switch to Traditional Public Administration). At the same time, Public Employment Service job matching tasks were outsourced to private agencies, in a principal-agent model where UWV, municipalities and employers had to act as principals. New Centers for Work and Income were set up for the first registration for benefits and assistance.

The UWV, Centers for Work and Income, and municipalities were expected to offer 'integrated services', but the how was left open.

In two thousand eight we saw a merger of UWV and Centers for Work and Income which can be regarded as a re-establishment of the Public Employment Service, but with limited tasks and significant cutbacks. New Public Management-type reform became even stronger in the aftermath of the financial and economic crisis and growing unemployment. The already minor role of New Public Governance in the original SUWI reform of two thousand two received even less political support these years: UWV and municipalities were no longer expected to provide integrated one-stop-shop services justifying the closure of two-thirds of the ninety-eight shared job centers which had been laboriously built up over the past decade. The national government made further major cutbacks at the UWV, as a result of which fifty percent of the work coaches lost their jobs and personal contact with clients was replaced by full digitization for most clients. In the general trend towards maximum efficiency, also sheltered workshops were no longer allowed to take on new clients that are supposed to find a 'regular job' at the labour market.

In two thousand fifteen, as in Norway, but in the Netherlands boosted by a social agreement with the social partners in two thousand thirteen, we see some revival of New Public Governance in horizontal cooperation of government authorities, municipalities and UWV, and social partners in thirty five 'labor market regions'. Regional Boards, Work Chambers, should coordinate the implementation of the Jobs Agreement Act of two thousand fifteen as part of the social agreement with social partners, aiming for one hundred twenty-five thousand jobs in two thousand twenty-six for people with physical and or mental handicaps. With the Participation Act of two thousand fifteen, local governments should conduct and integrate diverse social services, next to income support, and the largest municipality in each region has to coordinate regional collaboration with public and private parties for implementing the Jobs Agreement.

Although policy rhetoric was much about "decentralisation" in the Netherlands since two thousand fifteen, national regulations and conditions, for example for one service point to employers in each region and subsidized labour market projects, showed a gradual tendency toward recentralisation and standardization. In two thousand twenty, the Dutch government together with social partners, UWV and municipalities initiated Regional Mobility Teams to deal with an expected high job loss due to the Covid-nineteen pandemic. Here New Public Governance ideas of holistic services and collaboration between public and private partners returned to the reform agenda. In the latest revision of the SUWI Act, two thousand twenty-one, the Regional Mobility Teams were legally grounded, and a wider reform for Regional Work Centres is initiated by the national government. So there is reinforcement of the New Public Governance trend from two thousand fifteen; but with a larger role of central government and social partners despite 'decentralization'.

In sum, the Netherlands initially took an opposite reform trajectory than Norway in the nineteen nineties, with a move to NPG for PES instead of Norway with a more traditional administration combined with a principal-agent model. In the next decade, both countries switched their system in opposite directions, with the SUWI reform in two thousand two and the NAV reform in two thousand six. Reform in both countries thus shows major divergence, both over time and between the two nations. Since two thousand eight, we have seen more convergence as both nations have adopted (or extended) NPM to increase efficiency. Subsequent convergence is also visible in reforms for decentralization and street-level professionalism; and most recently in recentralization and standardization alongside a continued push for collaborative, person-centered services. So there is growing hybridity, but not necessarily more balance in welfare state governance.


## Divergence between Norway and the Netherlands in the current welfare administrations

Despite growing convergence in reform trends over the past fifteen years, there is significant divergence between the current two welfare administrations. We focus here on two key themes:

the relationship between central and decentralized governance (levels) and the role and position of key stakeholders (clients, social partners).


## Divergence in the relationship between governance levels

At the ministry level in Norway, both the state and the municipal part of NAV are the responsibility of Ministry of Labour and Social Inclusion. From the establishment of NAV in two thousand six, there were four hundred fifty-six local/regional offices, small and large. NAV consists of two hierarchies: one a state hierarchy of the directorate (national agency), regional offices and frontline offices, governed hierarchically, by instructions (although with a certain level of local autonomy), and two a relationship from the national level (the directorate), via supervision authorities at the regional level inspecting that municipalities fill their legal obligation to provide social services to the citizens. Cooperation at the local level can be voluntarily extended with other municipal social services, for example social housing, debt counseling, or for integration of newly arrived municipal services such as services for people with problems on (mental) health and drug abuse.

The NAV governance system is complicated in more ways: The regional offices (at the provincial level) are only "state" offices, with no role for municipalities. Also, the NAV directorate is both the highest management (of employment services and national insurances) with instructional authority, and supervisor (of municipal social services) but without instructional authority. As a result of mergers between municipalities and formalized cooperation between many NAV offices, the number of first-line offices was reduced to two hundred sixty-eight since twenty twenty, with a simultaneous increase in scale to enable more "robust", professional offices. This will probably result in more internal specialization and less voice for the municipalities.


## Table Three Central and decentralized governance in two welfare administrations

The Dutch welfare administration is managed differently, but the relationship between levels of government is just as complicated. Unlike the NAV, the national state agency UWV and the three hundred forty-two Dutch municipalities (twenty twenty-three) are separate public agencies. There is a split in regulation, clients and tasks: UWV is responsible for social benefits and employment services to the insured population of unemployed and disabled. Municipalities are responsible for social assistance and related services to the unemployed without acquired rights for insurance-based benefits or other income means (partner income, savings, house etc.). As a national executive agency, UWV is governed within ministerial authority (but with a certain leeway). But municipalities have formal autonomy, even though many tasks are delegated and financed by the central state. The UWV and municipalities in thirty-five labour market regions are obliged to cooperate with social partners for the Jobs Agreement Act twenty fifteen (and for regional labour market projects subsidized by national government), but neither the central level nor the local government (or social partners) have instructional authority and they will all have to arrive at shared goals and decisions.

Divergence between Norway and Netherlands in relationships with key stakeholders Increasingly the NAV offices are serving clients with reduced work capacity (not only caused by health conditions). Contact between jobseekers and employers is digitized and based on self-service. Retirement pension is digitized, so is income security under parental leave. Related to the NAV reform, the Directorate established "user councils" at the central, regional, and local level with members representing associations of clients as well as the employers (although not particularly well-functioning at the local level). New mandates for the councils were given in twenty fifteen. At the central level, the council is now described as a collaborative forum and an advisory body.

The Dutch UWV is serving only the insured clients with a work history. Contact between jobseekers and UWV is digitized and based on self-service, with face-to-face contact especially for the 'hard-to-place'. Municipalities serve clients on social assistance. With the SUWI reform, the Ministry established "user councils" at the central and local level with members representing associations of clients. Municipalities also have client councils, often volunteers. At the central level, the client council is described as an advisory body. They are only asked for advice by the government on policy implementation, not on policy or legislation itself.


## Table Four Welfare administrations: Relationships with clients and partners

In Norway, social partners do not have a governing role in the welfare administration for long now. Before nineteen ninety-nine the Directorate of Labour had a board with members of the social partners; in nineteen ninety-nine this board was replaced by an advisory council, with additional employer and employee associations. The ministry argued that this was in compliance with the ILO obligations. From two thousand four the Ministry has had a council for labour market and pension policy with social partners as members. Another kind of involvement of the social partners is the steady progress of so-called tripartite agreements on a more inclusive working life (the first concluded in two thousand one), aimed at preventing and reducing absenteeism and withdrawal from working life, previously also at the inclusion of people with disabilities and other groups outside the labour market. The latter goal has been removed from the agreement and replaced by a so-called "Inkluderingsdugnad" - a type of voluntary joint effort, introduced in twenty eighteen.

In the Netherlands, before two thousand two, social partners had a strong governing role in the welfare administration. With the SUWI reform, the social partners lost all their power in the executive bodies of social benefits and the PES, which was a major shock in the Dutch corporatist landscape. The former governing role of the social partners in social benefits was moved to a national state agency (UWV) and their major role in the PES board was 'replaced' by an advisory body (the Council for Work and Income, two thousand two - two thousand twelve). In twenty thirteen, the social partners reached a so-called "social agreement" with the government, including a Jobs Agreement for people with (physical/mental) disabilities. In twenty fifteen, this led to a certain return of social partners in the governance of the Dutch welfare administration, as members of the Central and Regional Work Chambers of the thirty-five Dutch labour market regions. Despite this role, their current position is much less direct and powerful than it was before two thousand two.

In short, divergence between current systems is expressed for both 'levels' and 'stakeholders'. Compared to the Netherlands, the Norwegian system has a much stronger degree of (compulsory) cooperation between the state and the municipalities (levels). However, the role of the social partners in the governance of the activation policy is stronger in the Netherlands. Clients are represented in advisory bodies in both countries, without a direct governing role.


## Discussion

In this paper we analysed whether reform trajectories in two welfare administrations reflect NPM and NPG ideas, and how the relationships between levels of government and between public and private stakeholders evolved into the current design of the welfare administrations. Three main lessons about convergence and divergence can be learned from our longitudinal study.


## Growing convergence and hybridity in reform

We have seen more convergence in reform paths lately but after an equally long period of strong divergence. In the first decade since nineteen ninety, both countries changed their welfare administration twice, and both times in different directions; we call this a 'double divergence' over time and between nations. While Champion and Bonoli perceived the NAV and SUWI reform as having similar characteristics, our findings suggest they represent different governance models: NPG ideas were prominent in the original two thousand six NAV reform, and NPM ideas are clearly reflected in the two thousand two SUWI reform. Lately we saw more convergence in reform trajectories: a joint adoption of NPM in both countries two thousand eight to twenty fourteen and a shared resurgence of NPG ideas since twenty fifteen, in line with the broader international trend towards decentralization and collaborative services. Recently both countries have again made efforts towards greater standardization and efficiency NPM. Although there seems increasing convergence in reforms between the two countries, it is early to say whether it will persist, as the period of more convergence lasts about as long as the previous divergent reforms.

Related to the many shifts in governance since nineteen ninety, both countries have developed more hybrid and complex systems over time. Alternating NPM and post-NPM, all reforms criticized the previously dominant organization of the welfare state according to traditional hierarchy and functional differentiation. But despite their often radical character, reforms did not completely replace previous models. Although hybridity with coexisting, overlapping and partly competing elements can be viewed "the rule rather than the exception of the new modes of governance currently being practiced in the provision of social services", so far the frequent reforms do not indicate that the different principles of TPA, NPM and NPG are well aligned. At least more balanced combinations of public management models appear necessary to prevent hybridity in a form of barely cohesive layers. Divergence between nations and policy fields

A second lesson is that increasing convergence in reform paths does not necessarily imply more similar welfare administrations. On the contrary, despite greater convergence in reforms since two thousand eight, the present welfare administrations in Norway and the Netherlands are more different than alike. Norway and the Netherlands thus proved to be two cases that can illustrate how a common 'activation' policy has led to significantly different welfare administrations.

Divergence usually points to the need for contextualized research as it is expected that the new welfare administrations take on a specific form due to different national socio-economic, institutional and political contexts. For example, Christensen and coauthors found "a strong element of path dependence in the reform trajectories" in a comparison of Germany, the United Kingdom, and Norway. Champion and Bonoli described the impact of path dependence as "once a country has started down a path, it becomes increasingly difficult and costly to completely depart from it," given increasing returns on prior investments. Contrasting, in our study path dependency does not seem an obvious explanation for the different reform paths and their impact on welfare administrations. After all, path dependence would imply that the initial path is reproduced in both countries, which is very different from the radical shifts we found over the past thirty years, most prominently in NAV and SUWI.

Also, it has been debated if economic crises and activation policies have triggered similar reform trends across countries. For example, the economic crisis since two thousand eight with the government in a strong role for saving banks could easily be viewed an important driver of common NPM-type interventions for efficiency gains in welfare administrations. It is tempting to link such an explanation to NAV's return of the benefit administration to the central level two thousand eight and SUWI's merger of UWV and CWI two thousand nine. But economic crises may also be a welcome excuse for national governments rather than a driver for administrative reform - as the said shifts in NAV and SUWI were already planned in two thousand six and two thousand seven, before the banks in two thousand eight erupted. So we should be careful to give too much explanatory power to common economic pressures.

To better understand governance and organizational reforms and hybrid shifts in governance regimes, we may need to delve deeper into the specificity of the policy field in which these shifts are taking place. Our study highlights important differences between the subfields in the welfare administrations. For example, there appears to be growing scope for decentralized actors and organizations in the PES, but the benefit administration shows an opposite trend towards more centralization. This might be related to the specific tasks and risks in national social insurance where decentralization could be less effective for large, automated systems and increase the risk of error. Conversely, the services provided by PES are closely tied to the local and regional labour market, and require cooperation with third parties and beyond professional borders to be effective, so here decentralization is a recurrent trend.

Our study also found a certain order in the reforms of the different areas of welfare administration over time that may help explain divergence and convergence. In both countries reforms started in the nineteen nineties with PES - a relatively small field compared to the social benefits administration in terms of public finance, vested interests of social partners, and employee numbers - , and in the two thousands reforms were expanded to the much larger field of social benefits. Despite the fact that we observed divergence between the leading public management models in the reforms in both countries, we view convergence in a similar attempt to enlarge the initial reform area of PES to the large field of social benefits in establishing a much wider reform (NAV and SUWI). Viewed in this way, there is divergence in reform trends between the two countries in terms of dominant NPG or NPM ideas, but convergence in increasingly comprehensive reform.


## Governance levels and relationships between stakeholders

A third lesson is that the (political) preference for central or decentral governance and for involving parties other than the government in the welfare administration can rapidly change. Norway has been described as social democratic and the Netherlands as corporatist, each with a tradition of strong relations with interest groups, social partners and civil society organizations. Both countries have then moved to coordination by 'market' and 'management' within a wider frame of state hierarchy and with a less crucial role of social partners in the welfare administration. However, we also saw divergence, especially in the past decade, that led to a certain "revival" of social partnership in the Netherlands, but not so much in Norway. This divergence needs more investigation. More broadly, we may ask is the reduced role of social partners over the past decades merely an effect of a political preference for 'more state' and/or 'more market', or is it the specific position of social partners in relationship with other policy areas or issues, that can explain differences between countries?

Critical doubts may also arise about reform trends that are often taken for granted in many policy studies, for example decentralization, outsourcing, or client orientation. For example, Weishaupt suggested decentralization could also be viewed as a process of recentralization where regional and local authorities are used as transmitters of national policy. Our study notices a common trend in Norway and the Netherlands where regional offices, and also municipalities and regional networks receive cumulative responsibilities, but at the same time operate under more central regulation and demands for efficiency. Our paper also pointed to the complexity associated with decentralization, where smaller municipalities have to scale up through mergers, joint intermunicipal social services or outsourcing to private and/or non-profit organizations.

Moreover, welfare administrations are coordinated in a multi-level environment, where not only PES, social benefits and social assistance are involved, but also other policy areas, for example health and education. Especially in the NPG reforms, more and more actors are involved within the various administrative levels that have different views on the service provision and the organizational and administrative principles. More research is needed of this wider policy context and organizations, in light of the importance of optimizing welfare administrations and the ongoing struggle between central and regional needs and related stakeholders to influence social and labour market policies.


## Conclusions

In this paper, Norway and the Netherlands have been used as critical cases to analyse convergence and divergence in reform efforts and their impact on the current welfare administrations. The two countries represent a general trend to change the labour market and social security system towards more "active" welfare states, to improve service coordination and responsiveness to client needs, and increase efficiency and innovation in service delivery. Their successive changes in social security and the promotion of paid work, as well as reforms in structure and coordination, such as the introduction of marketization in PES or the establishment of one stop-shops, reflect a broader international modernization trend visible in many OECD countries. We found that both countries significantly reformed their systems for welfare and employment services, using elements of NPM and post-NPM models, first moving in divergent ways and later showing more convergence in reform paths. However, although the welfare administrations in both countries significantly changed with increasingly similar types of reform, their current characteristics are more different than alike.

One conclusion is that a theory of public sector reform that aims to capture the role of NPM and NPG ideas in new welfare state arrangements should encompass the wider institutional context. Such a theory should go beyond the assumptions of the public management models and allow more room for explanations that take into account the social, historic and economic environment in which those reforms take place. However, as demonstrated by the radical reforms in both countries, path dependency did not explain divergence in our cases. Also the wider economic environment and economic crises did not fully explain divergence or convergence in reform. It has been noted that there is no clear explanation for variation in administrative reforms and their effects and there are still many differences in Europe when it comes to administrative reform. However, these are influenced not only by national institutions, but also by other institutional characteristics, "such as differences between ministries and agencies, policy areas, degree of autonomy and size of the organization." Rather than the usual focus on high-level institutional context factors, we suggest to dive more deeply in the political decision-making process, and the relationships between different policy fields, levels and stakeholders in understanding reform.

Another conclusion is that a long-term research perspective is crucial to understand the complex interplay between NPM and NPG ideas and wider context factors as drivers of reform. When studying characteristics of welfare administrations over relatively short periods, findings may only reflect a "temporary truth". For example, comparing Norway and the Netherlands in the nineteen nineties and early two thousands would have stressed their most different pathways of change rather than the later convergence. Also, certain stakeholders can take on different roles over time. For example, the social partners are more important in the past and present Dutch welfare administration compared to Norway, but studying their role exclusively between two thousand and two thousand thirteen/fifteen would have shown that the social partners were virtually absent in the Dutch welfare administration (except pension fund boards). These are important arguments for longitudinal studies to draw more balanced conclusions about public sector reform.

Our study also raises some further questions for future research. For example, in two thousand fifteen, well after the crisis of two thousand eight, a reform followed in both countries with a 'revival' of NPG ideas and a focus on decentralization. This raises the question of whether NPG-type reforms are contingent on relatively favourable economic conditions? Another fundamental issue is how different NPG reforms actually are from TPA and NPM? As Lapuente and Van der Walle argued: "Post-NPM represents a reassertion of old public administration values as well an attempt to remedy some of the disintegrating tendencies associated with NPM, and not an abandonment of NPM reforms." Other scholars have theoretically questioned if the models are internally consistent: NPM has at least two faces: market and management; and also NPG would have many meanings. However, we have shown in this paper that despite internal variety, the NPM and NPG models can be used to uncover convergence and divergence in reform characteristics and their impact on welfare administrations over time.

A final issue for further study is about radical-versus incremental reform. Pollitt and Dan argued that "The structure of political system may be facilitating or inhibiting for rapid or large-scale reform. The incremental decision-making process in, say, Norway or the Netherlands is more likely to inhibit such reform whereas the centralized, majoritarian system in the U K and a more consensual one is more likely to facilitate reform". We found the opposite effect in Norway and the Netherlands, where large-scale reform took place despite the incremental process. Or should we say that radical, largescale reform follows up on incremental decision-making that did not lead to consensus? Then it is the stalemate that facilitates a quite sudden, large-scale reform, especially when a political majority wants to leave behind the previous system.

To foster understanding of public sector reform, these issues need more attention in future comparative research.