## Role of the Endolysosomal System in Parkinson's disease

Abstract

Parkinson's disease is one of the most common neurodegenerative disorders, affecting one to one point five percent of the total population. While progress has been made in understanding the neurodegenerative mechanisms that lead to cell death in late stages of Parkinson's disease, mechanisms for early, causal pathogenic events are still elusive. Recent developments in Parkinson's disease genetics increasingly point at endolysosomal system dysfunction as the early pathomechanism and key pathway affected in Parkinson's disease. Clathrin-mediated synaptic endocytosis, an integral part of the neuronal endolysosomal system, is probably the main early target as evident in auxilin, RME-eight, and synaptojanin-one mutations that cause Parkinson's disease. Autophagy, another important pathway in the endolysosomal system, is crucial in maintaining proteostasis and a healthy mitochondrial pool, especially in neurons considering their inability to divide and requirement to function an entire lifetime. PINK-one and Parkin mutations severely perturb autophagy of dysfunctional mitochondria, both in the cell body and synaptic terminals of dopaminergic neurons, leading to Parkinson's disease. Endolysosomal sorting and trafficking is also crucial, which is complex in multi-compartmentalised neurons. VPS-thirty-five and VPS-thirteen-C mutations noted in Parkinson's disease target these mechanisms. Mutations in GBA comprise the most common risk factor for Parkinson's disease and initiate pathology by compromising lysosomal function. This is also the case for ATP-thirteen-A-two mutations. Interestingly, alpha-synuclein and LRRK-two, key proteins involved in Parkinson's disease, function in different steps of the endolysosomal pathway and target their components to induce disease pathogenesis. In this review, we discuss these endolysosomal system genes that are linked to Parkinson's disease and how their dysfunction results in Parkinson's disease pathogenesis.

The endolysosomal system is increasingly recognized as the key pathway affected in Parkinson's disease. Clathrin-mediated synaptic endocytosis, an integral part of the neuronal endolysosomal system, is probably the main early target. Autophagy, another important endolysosomal pathway that aids in maintaining proteostasis and a healthy mitochondrial pool is affected. Other crucial pathways such as endolysosomal sorting and trafficking, along with lysosomal degradation are also hampered. Key Parkinson's disease proteins such as alpha-synuclein and LRRK-two target the endolysosomal components to induce pathology. Here, we comprehensively discuss these mechanisms to better understand the role of endolysosomal system dysfunction in Parkinson's disease pathogenesis.

Parkinson's disease is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder, clinically identified by motor symptoms, with an increasing recognition of non-motor manifestations. Loss of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta (forty to fifty percent) and the presence of alpha-synuclein pathology in surviving neurons are the neuropathological hallmarks of Parkinson's disease. At the onset of motor symptoms, dopamine levels have decreased sixty to seventy percent in the dorsal striatum, where most substantia nigra pars compacta dopaminergic neurons form synaptic connections. Under physiological conditions, alpha-synuclein is predominantly present in presynaptic terminals, aiding neurotransmitter release, whereas in Parkinson's disease, alpha-synuclein tends to aggregate and form Lewy bodies (the defining alpha-synuclein pathology in Parkinson's disease). Aggregation of alpha-synuclein, perturbed proteostasis, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and impaired calcium homeostasis are the major cell-autonomous mechanisms of Parkinson's disease pathogenesis. Non-


## One. Endolysosomal system in neurons: Custom-made for neuronal function

cell-autonomous mechanisms include cell-to-cell transmission of pathological alpha-synuclein and neuroinflammation. So far, incomplete knowledge on causal mechanisms has limited treatment strategies to symptomatic relief. Recent studies targeting the endolysosomal system reveal that its dysfunction can lead to the mentioned disease mechanisms, suggesting the endolysosomal system as a key pathway in Parkinson's disease pathogenesis. In this review, we discuss important endolysosomal system components, their roles in neuronal survival, and how their dysfunction causes Parkinson's disease.

The endolysosomal system comprises complex, highly dynamic membrane-enclosed tubular-vesicular structures with overlapping properties and functions. They facilitate nutritional intake from a cell's microenvironment through endocytosis, neutralize pathogenic materials via phagocytosis, promote cellular proteostasis through autophagy, and maintain overall cellular homeostasis through endosomal sorting and trafficking of various proteins and enzymes across organelles. Endolysosomal system functions vary greatly depending on cell type and functional state. Neurons are unique in their highly polarized intracellular compartmentalization of cell body and processes including axons, axon terminals, and dendrites. This organization enables them to form complicated networks that mediate specialized functions. This complexity comes at a price: burdensome demands on the endolysosomal system, which has been increasingly implicated in neurological diseases including Parkinson's disease.

In neurons, synthesis of endolysosomal components occurs primarily in the cell body. These components are trafficked through the secretory pathway to their subcellular location. A prime example of this is lysosomal hydrolase trafficking. Lysosomal hydrolases are produced in the endoplasmic reticulum, then undergo glycosylation and other post-translational modifications at the Golgi apparatus, such as addition of mannose-six-phosphate groups. This modification directs hydrolases to lysosomes. More specifically, hydrolases form complexes with transmembrane mannose-six-phosphate receptors, which are sequestered into clathrin-coated vesicles budding from the trans-Golgi networks to form endosomes and early endosomes. Inside early endosomes, mannose-six-phosphate receptors detach from hydrolases and are recycled back to the trans-Golgi networks for their next round of transport, while hydrolases are delivered to lysosomes.

Simultaneously, early endosomes are also derived from the cell surface through the endocytic pathway, an integral part of the endolysosomal system. Many of the nutrients required for neuronal function and surface receptors designated for recycling are internalised through clathrin-mediated endocytosis at the plasma membrane and delivered to early endosomes. Early endosomes derived from both the trans-Golgi networks and the plasma membrane mature into late endosomes, where Rab-five and Rab-seven play a prominent role. This process occurs with the help of the endosomal sorting complex required for transport, which facilitates ubiquitin-dependent sorting of cargo and hydrolases from the outer membrane of early endosomes into interluminal vesicles.

Early endosomes derived from CME, if not sorted, follow a recycling pathway to the plasma membrane. ILVs are enveloped inside multivesicular bodies, which mature into late endosomes. These late endosomes deliver their luminal contents either by forming tubular extensions or by fusing with pre-existing lysosomes to form endolysosomes. These may be considered the final compartment of the endocytic pathway, where hydrolases degrade endocytic cargo and the membranes of ILVs for reuse. In addition, there is retrograde transport of receptors such as M six P and Lamp two A from endosomes to the TGN for reuse through the retromer complex, comprised mainly of VPS thirty-five, VPS twenty-six, and VPS twenty-nine. Proteins that are meant for secretion follow a secretory pathway from the TGN. Selective capture and elimination of a cell's damaged organelles and misfolded proteins happens through a process called macroautophagy, termed hereafter as autophagy, an integral part of the E L system. Double membrane vesicles called autophagosomes encapsulate unwanted/toxic cytosolic constituents including aggregated proteins and deliver them to the lysosome for degradation. Non-selective autophagy also occurs during starvation, through which cells can recycle proteins and reuse amino acids for the synthesis of basic proteins essential for cell survival. Therefore, autophagy plays a pivotal role in housekeeping and maintenance of neuronal homeostasis.

Customization of the E L system for neurons mainly happens in axons and synapses. At presynaptic terminals, vesicle precursors are delivered from the cell body and undergo vesicle cycling to form functional synaptic vesicles. However, delivery of new vesicle precursors cannot match the number of synaptic vesicles undergoing exocytosis to achieve neurotransmission at an active synapse. This deficit is solved by highly responsive CME, recapturing fused vesicular membranes from the presynaptic membrane to form clathrin-coated vesicles, which are in turn converted back to synaptic vesicles through clathrin uncoating. Less understood clathrin-independent bulk endocytosis and the "kiss and run" mechanism are also parts of the synaptic endocytic repertoire. In addition, there are dense-core vesicles derived from the TGN that are transported down the axons. Unlike synaptic vesicles, dense-core vesicles do not participate in synaptic vesicle recycling and are primarily used to secrete long-acting neuropeptides. While these processes are mostly confined to the presynaptic compartment, the E L system's postsynaptic compartment contributes to membrane trafficking pathways primarily aimed at receptor, transporter, and ion-channel recycling.

Though this complex E L system allows a neuron to function far away from its site of protein synthesis, the neuron is beholden to anterograde transport of proteins and membranes synthesized and modified in the soma for maintenance of axons and the synapses. Furthermore, constant synaptic activity, especially in continuously firing neurons like substantia nigra pars compacta dopaminergic neurons may result in considerable build-up of damaged organelles, membranes, and misfolded proteins. These need to undergo encapsulation by an autophagosome or endosome and retrograde transport to the


## Two. E-L system dysfunction: the holy grail of PD pathophysiology?

soma for lysosomal degradation. Here, long-distance axonal microtubule networks provide significant support to the neuronal E-L system. These spatial challenges to address a unique structural geometry, high metabolic demand, enhanced responsiveness to chemical/electrical stimulation, and the requirement for longevity due to their postmitotic nature, place a tremendous burden on the E-L system. Nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons have an additional burden in terms of long and highly branched axons, larger surface area, selective transporters for external toxins, large fluctuations in free Ca two plus, less buffering capacity, and higher oxidative stress, reducing their threshold for degeneration. These vulnerabilities are further exacerbated with aging. Faced with environmental and genetic risk factors, disease pathogenesis abounds.

In nineteen ninety-seven, identification of dominant mutations in the alpha-synuclein (SNCA) gene (PARK1) which encodes alpha-synuclein as a cause of familial PD, brought a conceptual shift toward the importance of genetics in disease pathogenesis. Subsequent findings revealed various other genetic mutations, with at least ten to fifteen percent of PD patients having familial PD of an absolute genetic origin. Leucine-rich repeat kinase two (LRRK2, PARK8) and Parkin (PRKN, PARK2) mutations are the most common genetic variants of dominant and recessively inherited PD, respectively. Mutations and gene multiplications of SNCA (PARK1 and PARK4) and Glucosidase Beta Acid (GBA) are also highly prevalent, whereas PD pathology was also noted with abnormal forms of Parkinsonism associated with deglycase or DJ1 (PARK7), and PTEN induced putative kinase one (PINK1, PARK6). There is also compelling evidence for a genetic component to sporadic PD. In fact, a rigid distinction between the genetic and environmental basis of PD pathogenesis may not exist considering that cases are phenotypically indistinguishable (except for the onset), implying genetic and sporadic cases share common underlying mechanisms. Even after considerable studies on these familial mutations and their interaction with environment, the core pathomechanisms of PD are still unclear, limiting treatment strategies. Over the past ten years, advancements in high-throughput sequencing, the application of genome wide association studies, and meta-analysis, have identified new genetic mutations. Intriguingly, most of these identified genes have links to the E-L system. Mechanistic studies also suggest that these proteins are the downstream targets of previously identified broad spectrum dysfunction in alpha-synuclein and LRRK2 mutations. It is now becoming clear that most PD-linked genes and known pathomechanisms are, in one way or another, associated with the E-L system, strongly suggesting this pathway as the key master regulator of PD pathogenesis. Recent studies suggest that neurodegeneration is initiated at the dopaminergic presynaptic terminals of striatum, years before the clinical diagnosis. Evidence that most of the E-L system genes associated with PD function at this terminal further establishes their fundamental role in PD pathogenesis. Below, we discuss our understanding of the known functions of these E-L system genes and their dysfunction in PD. We also discuss how other key PD-associated proteins target E-L pathways.


## Three. Clathrin-mediated synaptic vesicle endocytosis: A prime target?

Three point one. The DNAJ family of heat shock proteins in the presynaptic terminal and beyond:

SV endocytosis is predominantly mediated through CME. Following exocytosis, the SV membrane is endocytosed primarily through CME, which involves formation of a clathrin coat, composed of an outer clathrin layer and an inner layer of adaptors. The most common adaptors such as AP-two and AP-one eighty binds to endocytic motifs on the SV membrane, as well as phosphatidylinositol four, five-bisphosphate present in the plasma membrane. Endophilin A one and alpha-synuclein drive membrane bending and curvature formation of the developing clathrin coated pit. Following this, the clathrin coated pit in conjunction with dynamin and other accessory proteins undergoes membrane fission to form a CCV. Regeneration of SVs from CCVs and recycling of clathrin and related coat components for further endocytosis requires un-coating of clathrin from CCVs. The clathrin uncoating step is carried out by the coordinated action of the PI phosphatase synaptojanin-one and the co-chaperone auxilin with Hsc seventy. Endophilin A one and cyclin G Associated Kinase also regulate clathrin uncoating to facilitate CME at the presynaptic terminal. Mutations of these E-L system genes in familial PD envisage synaptic endocytosis dysfunction as a prime trigger for PD pathogenesis.

Auxilin: DNAJC6 gene encodes auxilin, the major presynaptic endocytic protein linked to PD. Auxilin is a brain specific co-chaperone belonging to the DNAJC family, a subclass of heat shock proteins (HSP forty). Auxilin plays an important role in clathrin un- coating, recruiting ATP-activated Hsc seventy to CCVs, which in turn, disassembles clathrin from vesicles facilitating their recycling. Loss-of-function autosomal recessive mutations of auxilin (PARK19) have been shown to cause juvenile/early onset PD, first observed in two teenage brothers of a Palestinian family. The study noted abnormal mRNA splicing and a decrease in auxilin mRNA levels. Other variants of auxilin mutations were later noted in a Brazilian family with similar mis-splicing of mRNA, whereas mutations affecting the J-domain (p. Q seven ninety-one star, p. Q eight forty-six star and p. R nine twenty-seven G) were observed in a few other consanguineous families. Along with typical PD symptoms, patients with nonsense mutations have cognitive impairment, one of the cardinal non-motor symptoms of PD. Epilepsy and mental retardation have also been noted for some PD patients with auxilin mutations. These human genetic studies suggest widespread neuronal dysfunction besides nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurodegeneration. Hence, future studies on post-mortem brains documenting PD-typical Lewy body pathology and dopaminergic neuronal loss are necessary to concretely categorize the pathology as PD or parkinsonism.

One of the few preclinical studies characterizing DNAJC6 reveals that auxilin down-regulation leads to progressive dopaminergic neuronal loss and motor disabilities in Drosophila. Furthermore, loss of auxilin exacerbates alpha-synuclein overexpression and paraquat-mediated dopaminergic loss, thus aggravating previously established phenotypes in fly models of PD. Interestingly, the brains (deep cerebellar nuclei) of adult homozygous auxilin knockout mice revealed an increased number of CCVs and empty cages at the synapse. Similar defects were noted in primary cortical and hippocampal neurons accompanied by defective SV endocytosis. Also, impairment was not immediately detrimental to the neurons, which may explain the post-developmental onset of PD symptoms and slow disease progression. Evaluating whether similar disruptions occur in nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons and how it mediates pathogenesis will prove crucial in understanding the role of auxilin and the E-L system in PD. An initial step towards this suggests that LRRK2 phosphorylates auxilin, attenuating auxilin's normal function in human iPSC derived dopaminergic neurons. The study further revealed that phosphorylation of auxilin by overexpressing LRRK2 leads to accumulation of oxidized dopamine and alpha-synuclein overexpression, pathological hallmarks of PD. Whether loss-of-function mutations in auxilin independently exert pathology through the same mechanisms is unknown. However, this newfound link between LRRK2 and auxilin points to the crucial and widespread involvement of E-L system in PD pathogenesis.

GAK: GAK is another DNAJC family protein, homologous (approximately fifty percent) to auxilin but expressed throughout the body. In a meta-analysis of PD GWAS across thirteen thousand seven hundred and eight patients and ninety-five thousand two hundred and eighty-two controls, GAK was identified as a risk gene for PD which was confirmed in another recent large-scale study. However, GAK's role in PD is still contentious due to the presence of mutations in TMEM175 in a nearby independent locus, which shares the same promoter as that of GAK. What adds credence is that, like auxilin, GAK functions in clathrin un-coating by recruiting Hsc70 to CCVs. Results show that GAK overexpression can partially compensate for loss of auxilin, which is also noted to upregulate naturally in auxilin knockout mice. Another similarity between auxilin and GAK has been noted in their interaction with LRRK2. Brain-specific loss of GAK and ubiquitous knockout of GAK are both lethal (postnatal and embryonic, respectively). The inability of auxilin to compensate for GAK in these mice suggests another unique role for GAK in neurons, perhaps a significant one in dopaminergic neurons. Further TMEM175 deficiency is noted to cause PD-like alpha-synuclein aggregation, along with impairment of lysosomal and mitochondrial function. Clarity on the role of GAK will prove to be crucial not only in establishing its involvement in PD but also in consolidating CME as the prime target in PD pathogenesis.

RME-eight: Receptor mediated endocytosis eight or DNAJC13 is another DNAJC family co-chaperone and principally functions in regulating retromer and clathrin un-coating dynamics on endosomes. RME-eight mutations (p.N855S) in autosomal-dominant PD (PARK21) was noted first in a Dutch-German-Russian family of Mennonite origin, with multiple incidences. Post-mortem brains of PD patients with RME-eight mutations revealed strong immunoreactivity for Lewy bodies in the substantia nigra, along with brain areas implicated in non-motor symptoms of PD. Nigral Lewy bodies were also found to be co-localized with RME-eight. Unlike other DNAJC proteins


## Three point two: Synaptojanin-One and endophilin A: Partners in crime?

implicated in Parkinson's disease, in vitro studies have revealed that the RME-Eight mutation confers toxic gain-of-function, leading to endolysosomal cargo trafficking deficits. The RME-Eight mutation is also predicted to affect overall endosomal trafficking, even in the soma and postsynaptic compartment, unlike the synapse-specific dysfunction predicted for auxilin. Recently, the link between RME-Eight and Parkinson's disease has been muddied by an independent analysis of the same Mennonite family which did not find RME-Eight mutations. Instead, all the affected individuals were identified to carry mutations in TMEM two hundred thirty, which also functions in the endolysosomal system, perhaps at synapses. Hence, further studies are warranted to confirm the genetic link between RME-Eight and Parkinson's disease. Still, evaluating the RME-Eight mediated endolysosomal system dysfunction might provide valuable insights in understanding Parkinson's disease.

Two other major synaptic endocytic proteins besides the DNAJ family that are implicated in Parkinson's disease are synaptojanin-One (SYNJ1) and endophilin A family. SYNJ1 is a Sac domain-containing protein with two different phosphatase domains; Five-phosphatase and Sac One which target different phosphoinositide phosphates. Five-phosphatase regulates synaptic vesicle endocytosis by dephosphorylating PI Four Five P Two to facilitate uncoating of clathrin-coated vesicles in cooperation with Hsc seventy and auxilin, whereas Sac One domain has gained importance due to its link to Parkinson's disease. The p.R two hundred fifty-eight Q missense mutations in the Sac domain were identified independently in two consanguineous families of Italian and Iranian origin. Homozygous missense mutations of SYNJ1 Sac domain are noted to cause autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease with extrapyramidal features identical to patients with auxilin mutations. Interestingly, they responded poorly to L-dopa treatment, indicating the need for preclinical studies to understand the exact pathomechanisms. Recent observations by Cao et al. suggest that the Sac domain plays a previously unappreciated role in clathrin uncoating. Mice with SYNJ1 Sac mutations, knock-in, developed Parkinson's disease-like characteristics and featured synaptic endocytosis defects, including accumulating of clathrin-coated vesicles. Furthermore, elevated auxilin and parkin levels were noted in these mice, suggesting the profound effect of Sac mutations on other proteins linked to Parkinson's disease. Studies on fibroblasts from patients with SYNJ1 mutations suggested defective endocytic trafficking. Other studies have shed light on the involvement of SYNJ1 in regulating synaptic autophagy. Mutations in the Sac One domain of SYNJ1 in both Drosophila neurons and PARK twenty patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells severely affected synaptic autophagosome formation but not endocytosis. This discrepancy and the precise relationship between synaptic vesicle endocytosis and synaptic autophagy remains to be clarified. However, the Drosophila model revealed loss of dopaminergic neurons, providing evidence for the contribution of synaptic autophagy defects in pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. Considering its dual enzymatic activity, SYNJ1 is also believed to play a role in fast endophilin-mediated, clathrin-independent endocytosis which is an alternative to clathrin-mediated endocytosis and several other processes. Further studies are warranted to understand if SYNJ1 exerts its effects on Parkinson's disease pathogenesis through any of the alternative endocytic pathways.


## Four. Autophagy in Parkinson's disease; cause and effect, hand in hand:

Four point one PINK1 and Parkin:

SYNJ1 recruitment to endocytic membrane is facilitated by endophilin A, a protein drawing attention in Parkinson's disease pathogenesis for a while, despite its locus variation being just identified as a risk factor. This is because of endophilin A's close association with SYNJ1 and its link to the most important proteins involved in Parkinson's disease. One of our earlier studies indicated that overexpression of alpha-synuclein decreases endophilin A levels, while deletion of synucleins had the opposite effect. As noted in SYNJ1 knock-ins, endophilin knockout also leads to synaptic vesicle endocytosis defects, accumulation of clathrin-coated vesicles, elevation of parkin levels, and other parkinsonian features. Gain-of-function mutations in LRRK2 hyper-phosphorylate endophilin A, the fly homolog, leading to synaptic endocytosis dysfunction. LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation of endophilin A is also noted to regulate synaptic autophagy. Owing to the relatively higher frequency of LRRK2 mutations and its involvement in sporadic Parkinson's disease, endophilin A may prove to be another crucial protein involved in Parkinson's disease.

Neurons need to constantly maintain homeostasis by preserving healthy organelles and functional proteins, while selectively capturing and eliminating damaged organelles and misfolded proteins. Autophagy, an integral component of the endolysosomal system, is an intracellular proteostasis pathway that performs this house-cleaning function. It was initially identified in cell lines to function in maintaining energy homeostasis during critical periods of development and in response to nutrient depletion. Intriguingly, nutrient depletion does not induce autophagy in neurons, but a complete lack of autophagy can cause lethal neurodegeneration, emphasizing its important role in survival. Since neurons are postmitotic and long-lived, they are particularly vulnerable to accumulation of toxic proteins. In addition, greater dependency of neurons on mitochondria for energy instead of glycolytic pathways demands constant mitochondrial turnover, leading to many malfunctioning mitochondria. Both these factors play major roles in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease.

Role in Mitophagy and Beyond. Under physiological conditions, autophagy plays a crucial role in clearing unwanted proteins, as well as damaged mitochondria through a targeted mechanism called mitophagy. Loss-of-function mutations in PINK1 and Parkin, result in recessively-inherited early-onset PD and significantly, both genes were discovered to be essential for mitophagy. PINK1 is a serine/threonine protein kinase that acts as a surveillance molecule for mitochondrial health and accumulates on the outer membrane of abnormal mitochondria. PINK1 attracts recruitment of Parkin to damaged mitochondria, which through its E three ubiquitin ligase activity, coats the mitochondria with ubiquitin triggering autophagosomes to engulf the mitochondria, culminating in lysosomal degradation. Discoveries of PINK1 and Parkin mutations were the first genes to shed


## Four point two. Synaptic autophagy and axonal transport: a road less travelled in PD research

light on the direct involvement of autophagy and E-L system in PD pathogenesis. These observations also helped in validating previous neurotoxic studies which identified mitochondrial dysfunction as one of the primary causes of neurodegeneration. Though the symptoms are indistinguishable from sporadic cases, several studies on brains of PD patients with Parkin mutations do not show a-synuclein aggregation and Lewy body pathology. Only one report suggests PINK1-linked parkinsonism to be associated with Lewy pathology. This prompts us to speculate if there are alternative neuropathological cascades in PD that are a-synuclein independent but centered around the E-L system. In addition to their well-defined roles in mitophagy, Parkin was identified to modulate E-L system through Rab7 ubiquitination, whereas PINK1 phosphorylates some Rab proteins. It is also worth noting that several of these rab proteins, for example Rab7, regulate mitochondrial dynamics and quality control independent of Parkin/PINK1. Parkin mutations are also known to directly affect retromer recruitment and interact strongly with VPS thirty-five by ubiquitinating it. Parkin binds to endophilin A and functions in its ubiquitination. Parkin also ubiquitinates EPS fifteen to regulate epidermal growth factor receptors and phosphoinositide three-kinase P I three K-Akt signaling that plays a role in neuronal survival. These developments suggest mitophagy-independent routes these proteins may take towards PD. Further investigations of Parkin and PINK1 in this direction might provide crucial insights in understanding neurodegenerative mechanisms that are Lewy-body independent.

a-Synuclein aggregates initially in presynaptic termini, where the protein is enriched. a-Synuclein aggregates are a major target for autophagy-mediated degradation. In both genetic and sporadic PD, aggregated a-synuclein is likely to enhance autophagosome formation to meet the higher demand for its degradation. Once threshold reaches beyond compensatory limits, mutant/overexpressed a-synuclein starts to accumulate, turning detrimental to cellular homeostasis. In fact, A fifty-three T and A thirty P a-synuclein mutants blocked their own uptake and other substrates by lysosomes for degradation through the chaperone-mediated autophagy pathway in vitro. Dopamine-modified a-synuclein is identified to further exacerbate this process, which may explain the selective vulnerability of dopaminergic neurons in PD. A recent study on mammalian cells and transgenic mice shows that a-synuclein overexpression mediated autophagy defects are exerted through Rab one a inhibition. Further understanding of the mechanisms for a-synuclein-autophagy crosstalk in PD might have crucial therapeutic applications. Backing this notion, both in vitro and in vivo studies show that enhancing autophagy and autophagosome-lysosome fusion could ameliorate PD-like features by clearing aggregated a-synuclein.

Several other PD causing genes associated with the E-L system exert their pathological effects through impairing synaptic autophagy. The R two fifty-eight Q SynJ one mutation directly affects autophagosome biogenesis and maturation at synaptic terminals of flies and neurites of human iPSC derived neurons. The observation of dopaminergic neuronal loss in these flies suggests autophagosome generation defects as one of the possible mechanisms through which SynJ one mutations lead to dopaminergic neurodegeneration and PD. Presynaptic endocytic membrane bending protein endophilin A also has functions in providing docking sites for autophagy proteins and facilitating autophagosome expansion. This is achieved by phosphorylation of endophilin A-BAR domain by LRRK two, as noted in a fly model. Congruent to these observations, mice lacking endophilin A revealed deficiency in autophagosome formation and developed a Parkinsonian phenotype. These studies, along with recent finding of clathrin involvement in autophagy regulation, suggest a cooperative crosstalk between S-V endocytosis and autophagy.

Macromolecules and organelles in the presynaptic terminal travel a long distance from the soma, making them old and vulnerable. Rapid turnover of proteins, membranes, receptors, and vesicles in the pre-synapse assigns autophagy a major role in maintaining synaptic homeostasis. This tasks synaptic autophagy with quality control responsibilities. Though there is compelling evidence that compromised autophagy contributes to PD, these studies primarily looked at the soma from a proteinopathy or mitophagy perspective. Selective inactivation of autophagy by conditional knockout of autophagy protein atg seven in dopaminergic neurons leads to enhanced dopamine release and rapid presynaptic recovery with abnormal axonal profiles. Conversely, autophagy enhancement through mTOR inhibition slows dopamine release, reduces the number of synaptic vesicles, and increases autophagosome density in the axons. These results emphasize the importance of synaptic autophagy in normal dopamine transmission and further evaluation is warranted to understand if additional synaptic autophagy defects exist, which may lead to PD pathogenesis.

Another unique and stressful situation for neurons is that autophagosomes loaded with unwanted materials from an active presynaptic terminal need to be transported a long distance to the soma for lysosomal degradation. Microtubule and scaffolding proteins aid in this retrograde axonal transport of autophagosomes and are crucial for the normal functioning of E-L system. During their transport, autophagosomes mature into autolysosomes by fusing with late-endosomes or lysosomes towards the proximal end of the axon. There are recent studies suggesting lysosomal degradation at the distal end, especially of mitophagosome mediated by Parkin-PINK1. This is predicted to provide rapid neuroprotection against oxidative stress by damaged mitochondria, without requirement for retrograde transport. Axonal transport aids this function through anterograde transport of E-L system components required for degradation from soma towards distal end. Any defect in this to-and-fro transport machinery can completely clog the E-L system and other processes. Considering its functional significance in neuronal survival, axonal transport might hold clues for understanding pathological mechanisms. Abnormal axonal swelling with lysosomal accumulation has been noted in Alzheimer's disease, blocking the retrograde transport of autophagosomes. Similar understanding on the health of axonal transport machinery and


## Five. Sometimes, there are traffic issues: E-L system trafficking in PD

its dynamics in PD is crucial towards finding commonalities amongst neurodegenerative diseases.

The multi-compartmentalized nature of neurons puts tremendous pressure on the endosomal sorting and trafficking machinery, which is also true in case of nigrostriatal neurons. The vacuolar protein sorting group of proteins that form retromer complex comprising of VPS thirty-five, VPS twenty-six, and VPS twenty-nine are crucial in retrograde trafficking and sorting of protein cargos from endosomes to the TGN, facilitating their recycle and reuse. The retromer complex also functions in sorting proteins or cargo to regulate endosomal and lysosomal maturation. Pedigrees with single allelic mutation in VPS thirty-five revealed autosomal dominant, late-onset, L-dopa-responsive PD, with striking similarities to idiopathic PD. Broadly, it is proposed that the mutant VPS thirty-five fails to associate with other components of the retromer complex, resulting in impaired retrograde trafficking. Induced loss-of-function mutations of VPS thirty-five in vitro resulted in enlargement of late-endosomes and aggregation of alpha-synuclein oligomers. Another study on flies revealed ceramide accumulation due to VPS thirty-five deficiency, suggesting lysosomal dysfunction. Alpha-synuclein accumulation in nigral dopaminergic neurons, loss of dopaminergic neurons, reduced dopamine transporter levels in the striatum, and locomotory deficits were noted in VPS thirty-five deficient mice. Further in vitro studies of VPS thirty-five (D six twenty N) mutant cells revealed dysfunction in endosome-to-Golgi retrieval of lysosomal membrane proteins (LAMP two A) and accelerated lysosomal degradation of LAMP two A. LAMP two A is considered important in directing misfolded alpha-synuclein to lysosomes, suggesting a mechanism for alpha-synuclein accumulation in VPS thirty-five deficiency. VPS thirty-five mutations also affect autophagy and dendritic AMPA receptor trafficking. VPS thirty-five mutations bring severe abnormality in mitochondrial dynamics, as noted in cultured dopaminergic neurons, mice SNpc neurons, and in PD patient derived fibroblasts. Oxidative stress implicated in sporadic PD might mediate pathogenesis through VPS thirty-five driven mitochondrial defects. VPS thirty-five also has a role in biogenesis of mitochondria-derived vesicles, further suggesting that its dysfunction causes mitochondrial pathology and neurodegeneration. VPS thirty-five is functionally linked to LRRK two, boosting its kinase activity. In fact, decreased VPS thirty-five levels were noted in the SNpc of PD patients with LRRK two mutations. Interestingly, overexpression of VPS thirty-five ameliorated locomotor deficits and enhanced lifespan in LRRK two mutant models, which was also seen in Parkin mutant models. Neuroprotection was also noted against MPP plus induced toxicity in dopaminergic neurons. Along with its E-L sorting functions, these links between VPS thirty-five and alpha-synuclein, LRRK two, Parkin, lysosomal dysfunction, autophagy, mitochondrial perturbations, and oxidative stress strongly suggest VPS thirty-five as a good therapeutic target.


## Six. Lysosomes: PD may also begin at the end of the tunnel

Another VPS family member associated with PD is VPS13C. Five allelic variations in VPS13C gene can lead to autosomal recessive, early-onset PD, primarily due to premature termination of VPS13C. Patients were noted with cardinal PD symptoms and extrapyramidal signs. Post-mortem studies revealed alpha-synuclein/ubiquitin positive-Lewy bodies in the brain stem, limbic system, hippocampus, and cortical associative areas. A few studies reveal that VPS13 functions in the TGN-endosomal cycle, whereas recent discoveries have also located it on the outer mitochondrial membrane. In fact, siRNA-mediated silencing of VPS13C resulted in lower mitochondrial membrane potential, mitochondrial fragmentation, increased respiratory rates, exacerbated Parkin-dependent mitophagy, and upregulation of Parkin in response to mitochondrial damage. A new study also revealed VPS13C's role in forming membrane contact sites and facilitating lipid transfer between the ER and mitochondria. This is noteworthy, considering lipid transfer's increasing recognition in disease pathogenesis.

Since lysosomes are the destination for most E-L system vesicles carrying a variety of cargos for degradation and recycling, dysfunction in any of its components results in lysosomal storage disorders, severely perturbing cellular homeostasis. A growing body of evidence suggests Lysosomal Storage Disorders increase risk for PD pathogenesis. Among them, Gaucher disease confers the greatest risk, where five to fifteen percent of Gaucher disease patients or carriers develop PD later in life, to an extent where causal GBA mutations are the most common genetic risk factor for PD. GBA encodes glucocerebrosidase one, which facilitates breakdown of glucosylceramide into glucose and ceramide. In its absence, glucosylceramide accumulates and undergoes partial enzymatic deacylation to glucosylsphingosine and other more complex glycosphingolipids, which mediate disease pathogenesis. GBA is a relatively well studied E-L system gene with regards to PD, both in terms of post-mortem brains, clinical investigations, and basic research. Reduced glucocerebrosidase one activity in substantia nigra, putamen, and other brain areas of PD patients with GBA mutations have been noted along with glucosylceramide and glycosphingolipids accumulation. Interestingly, similar observations were made even in sporadic PD patients, suggesting an even broader role for GBA than just mutations and potentially involve epigenetic and environmental modifiers of GBA. Glucocerebrosidase one levels decrease with aging, the major risk factor for PD, indicating GBA's possible role in lowering the nigral neurons' threshold to develop PD. Cognitive areas such as hippocampus, frontal cortex, and amygdala also showed relative decrease in glucocerebrosidase one activity, along with a significant elevation of hippocampal glucosylsphingosine in sporadic cases. This correlates with a higher Lewy body burden identified in the hippocampus and medial temporal regions, as well as a diffused cortical Lewy body pathology in GBA-linked PD. These pathological observations strengthen clinical findings that cognitive deterioration is severe in PD patients with GBA mutations compared to that of sporadic cases. These features indicate mouse models of

PD with GBA mutations are important in studying lipid dyshomeostasis and understand mechanisms of cognitive dysfunction in PD.

A recent study provides evidence for an association between loss of glucocerebrosidase one activity, glycosphingolipids accumulation, and alpha-synuclein aggregation, both in vitro and in vivo models of GBA mutation. Glucosylsphingosine was shown to promote pathological alpha-synuclein aggregates, capable for further self-templating, was shown to accumulate in the brains of young homozygous GBA mutant and knockout mice, implicating this glycosphingolipid in PD pathogenesis. Even in heterozygous GBA mutations, the glucocerebrosidase one activity decreased with age to an extent where mice reached threshold for haploinsufficiency, mimicking the human condition. Furthermore, the GBA mutant mice, when crossed with well characterized alpha-synuclein transgenic PD mice, revealed accelerated PD progression including alpha-synuclein aggregation and motor deficits. Alpha-synuclein aggregation has also been seen in human IPSCs derived neurons from Gaucher disease and PD patients that are exposed to glucocerebrosidase one inhibitors, and in those carrying GBA mutations. Mutations in GBA also cause misprocessing of glucocerebrosidase one in the ER, leading to ER retention of glucocerebrosidase one. This produces ER stress and auto-lysosomal perturbations causing an abnormal lipid profile and increased alpha-synuclein accumulation and secretion. This study along with a few other observations suggest dopaminergic dysfunction due to gain-of-function mutations in GBA. However, therapeutic strategies based on loss-of-function observations have been successful, arguing against a gain of function model. Activation of residual glucocerebrosidase one by small molecules and chaperones and ameliorating glycosphingolipid accumulation by inhibiting glucosylceramide synthase lowered alpha-synuclein pathology and reinstated lysosomal health. These strategies are already being tested in clinics.

ATPase cation transporting thirteen A two, another lysosomal protein which localizes on its membrane with unknown function, has been implicated in Parkinson's disease. Autosomal recessive, early-onset parkinsonism due to ATP thirteen A two mutations were first noted in Kufor-Rakeb Syndrome, followed by recent studies in other forms of parkinsonism. Fibroblasts from these patients showed impaired lysosomal acidification and proteostasis, leading to inefficiency in substrate degradation and autophagosome clearance. These observations were replicated in ATP thirteen A two knockdown dopaminergic cell lines, where its restoration re-established lysosomal homeostasis and ameliorated cell death. Downregulation of ATP thirteen A two was also seen in nigral neurons of sporadic Parkinson's disease patients, along with traces in Lewy bodies. A loss-of-function ATP thirteen A two mutant mouse model revealed age-related lysosomal dysfunction, protein aggregation, and gliosis leading to motor abnormalities. Interestingly, the levels of total and oligomeric alpha-synuclein were normal, despite ubiquitinated protein aggregation, cathepsin-D dysfunction, and autophagy defects. These observations suggest that ATP thirteen A two mutations may lead to Parkinson's disease through an alpha-synuclein independent mechanism.


## Seven. E-L system; a key target of key Parkinson's disease-associated proteins?

Seven point one. alpha-synuclein:

Misfolded alpha-synuclein can trigger Parkinson's disease pathogenesis in the presynaptic terminals of nigrostriatal neurons. This may as well be one of the earliest pathogenic events in Parkinson's disease, where alpha-synuclein aggregates target synaptic vesicle endocytosis, synaptic vesicle trafficking, and autophagy components of the E-L system to initiate or exacerbate dopaminergic neuronal dysfunction.

Alpha-synuclein and other family members function in presynaptic terminals, where they modulate synaptic vesicle distribution and neurotransmission. The biophysical properties of synucleins reveal their ability to sense and modify membrane curvature. These functions suggest that synucleins regulate synaptic vesicle exocytosis and endocytosis. Studies in knockout mice in fact show that synucleins normally function post synaptic vesicle exocytosis, in fusion pore expansion and/or control the kinetics of synaptic vesicle endocytosis by facilitating membrane curvature. Alpha-synuclein also appears to control synaptic vesicle availability for release by regulating synaptic vesicle clustering.

On a pathological level, several studies show that overexpression of alpha-synuclein inhibits neurotransmission. The locus of this consistent effect is not clear. Studies have shown that elevated alpha-synuclein levels and oligomeric alpha-synuclein inhibit synaptic vesicle exocytosis in a SNARE-dependent manner or affecting synaptic vesicle clustering. On the other hand, considerable evidence suggests that aggregated alpha-synuclein primarily impacts synaptic vesicle endocytosis, which is of relevance to E-L system genes linked to Parkinson's disease. In lamprey giant synapses, injection of aggregated alpha-synuclein is identified to inhibit clathrin uncoating as evidenced by the accumulation of clathrin-coated vesicles when synaptic vesicle recycling was evoked by high-frequency stimulation. A recent study also suggests that extra synuclein might sequester Hsc seventy thus affecting clathrin uncoating, subsequently causing synaptic vesicle recycling defects. Similar observation was made in mammalian Calyx of Held synapse, where acute elevation of monomeric and mutant alpha-synuclein levels decreased synaptic vesicle endocytosis with frequency-dependent effect on synaptic vesicle exocytosis. This was also seen upon transgenic expression of alpha-synuclein. Overexpression of mutant alpha-synuclein also affects dopamine transporter trafficking on the presynaptic membrane, leading to dopamine dyshomeostasis. The observations that overexpression and deletion of synucleins have similar effects on synaptic vesicle exo- and endocytosis suggest that synaptic vesicle cycling is exquisitely sensitive to alpha-synuclein levels. Further understanding of the precise mechanisms for interactions of alpha-synuclein and synaptic E-L system proteins involved in Parkinson's disease will provide crucial insights on early causal pathogenic events in Parkinson's disease.

At the soma, aggregated alpha-synuclein mainly targets E-L system trafficking, especially the retromer pathway. Recent studies propose that aggregated alpha-synuclein disrupts the retromer complex by interacting through VPS twenty-six or VPS twenty-nine, and thus preventing the recruitment of


## Seven point two. LRRK two:

adaptors like Snx three and SNX-BAR dimers. Deficiency of VPS thirty-five in dopaminergic neurons impairs endosome-to-Golgi retrieval of receptors like Lamp two a, accelerating its lysosomal degradation. Lamp two a is a critical receptor for chaperone-mediated autophagy of misfolded alpha-synuclein, so its deficiency leads to a vicious cycle of alpha-synuclein accumulation, which might be the case in patients with VPS thirty-five mutations. Overexpression of alpha-synuclein also directly compromises macroautophagy through inhibition of Rab one a. It is also pertinent to note that aggregated alpha-synuclein in the soma is a key target of treatment strategies in development through induction of macroautophagy.

Recent developments suggest that alpha-synuclein pathology spreads in a prion-like manner through synaptically connected regions in a manner consistent with Braak staging. The E-L system plays a prominent role in cell-to-cell transmission of preformed alpha-synuclein filaments, leading to the spread of phospho-alpha-synuclein pathology. Internalization of fibrillar alpha-synuclein occurs via endocytosis (as well as tunnelling nanotubules) and follows the neuronal endosomal pathway to lysosomal degradation. Heparan sulfate proteoglycans, lymphocyte-activation gene three, alpha-three isoform of sodium/potassium ATPase, and a few endocytic vesicle receptors are predicted to act as receptors for alpha-synuclein preformed fibrils. In vitro studies suggest that internalized alpha-synuclein fibrils are localized in both early endosomes and late endolysosomes. The lipid bilayer of endosomes restricts cytoplasmic spillage, so most endocytosed alpha-synuclein is degraded by lysosomes. How a fraction of alpha-synuclein preformed fibrils escapes this barrier and goes on to initiate seeding is still unclear. Studies of alpha-synuclein axonal transport predict that retrograde transport of alpha-synuclein preformed fibrils is mediated by endocytic vesicles and is twice as fast and more efficient than anterograde transport. This strengthens the notion that PD pathology spreads retrogradely from the synaptic terminal to soma. The E-L system is also involved in exocytosis of fibrilized alpha-synuclein, facilitating its prion-like spread. An ER-bound enzyme with chaperone activity USP19 (Ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase nineteen) has been shown to deliver misfolded alpha-synuclein to late endosomes, which then fuses with the plasma membrane through a unique process called misfolding-associated protein secretion. Another recent study suggests that the DNAJ/Hsc70 complex could facilitate alpha-synuclein exocytosis. Overexpression of ATP13A2 and GBA is also noted to increase exocytosis of alpha-synuclein. Together, these observations identify the E-L system as the primary conduit for the spread of alpha-synuclein-mediated pathology in PD.

Leucine-Rich Repeat Kinase two (LRRK two) is a multidomain large protein with both GTPase and kinase activity along with other domains for protein-protein interaction. Epidemiological, histopathological, and clinical investigations have all established LRRK two gene mutations as the most common genetic cause of PD, with a considerable contribution to sporadic cases. Over eight identified LRRK two mutations cause PD. The mutation at

G two thousand nineteen S is the most common and is known to increase LRRK two's activity. LRRK two functions have been explored through PD-related studies, in which increased G two thousand nineteen S kinase activity reveals its close association with the E-L system. LRRK two's role in vesicular trafficking, lysosomal homeostasis, and autophagy are well accepted. Phosphorylation by LRRK two is essential for a subset of RAB GTPases' function of endolysosomal vesicular sorting and trafficking. In an overexpression system, RAB7L one was noted to interact strongly with LRRK two at the switch-two site, unlike as seen in in vitro kinase assays. Several LRRK two mutations significantly affect RAB pathways, where variations in Rab7L one's interactions with LRRK two have been identified to increase the risk of sporadic PD. In fact, recent GWAS identify RAB29 encoding RAB7L one as an independent risk gene for PD. Rab7L one upregulation could attenuate LRRK two-induced toxicity in dopaminergic neurons. This is predicted to be functioning through VPS35 and VPS26. VPS35 also cooperates with LRRK two to regulate SV recycling and dopaminergic synaptic release, thus suggesting a prominent role for the retromer complex in LRRK two-mediated PD pathogenesis.

LRRK two regulates lysosomal protein trafficking and morphology. In LRRK two mutants, perinuclear lysosomal clustering was noted, mediated by increased phosphorylation of RAB seven. Two-pore channels are the calcium channels present on acidic vesicles of the E-L system and help in regulating their trafficking and fusion of lysosomes with autophagosomes/endosomes. Abnormal lysosomal morphology and density seen in fibroblasts from patients with LRRK two mutations could be reversed by inhibiting these two-pore channels. Thus, these channels might be one potential mediator of E-L system dysfunction in LRRK two-associated PD. Lysosome-related proteins involved in PD such as Gcase one, Lamp two A and ATP13A two are also downregulated in PD patients with LRRK two mutations, suggesting lysosomes are one of LRRK two's prime targets.

Mechanisms for LRRK two-mediated autophagy defects are still elusive. The ability of LRRK two kinase inhibitors to reverse autophagy dysfunction suggest that kinase activity may be significant. Mutant LRRK two is also a substrate for chaperone-mediated autophagy, impairment of which could exacerbate pathological implications. Accumulation of MVBs and malformed autophagosomes were noted in LRRK two R one four four one C mutations. Intra-axonal autophagic vacuole defects in nigral dopaminergic projections were seen in mice expressing human LRRK two. It also regulates synaptic autophagy through phosphorylation of endophilin A. G two zero one nine S mutations are known to induce autophagy through M A P K, E R K kinases, and some studies suggest LRRK two-mediated autophagy regulation is largely independent of mT O R. Since RAB-mediated trafficking is crucial for autophagy, which is also affected in LRRK two mutations, it is important to evaluate if autophagy defects are the consequences of RAB dysregulation or a direct effect of LRRK two mutations.


## Eight. Future Directions:

LRRK2 regulates the SV cycle by interacting with endolysosomal system proteins that are also implicated in Parkinson's disease: auxilin, Synaptojanin-1, and endophilin A. LRRK2 overactivity phosphorylates auxilin in its clathrin binding domain, making their interaction weaker. This leads to disruption of SV endocytosis. This was noted in patient induced pluripotent stem cell-derived dopaminergic neurons, along with accumulation of oxidized dopamine, increased alpha-synuclein levels, and decreased Glucocerebrosidase one activity.

Hyperphosphorylation of endophilin A and Synaptojanin-1 by LRRK2 significantly altered synaptic endocytosis. A recent study showed that LRRK2 can directly bind to clathrin-light chains through its GTPase domain, affecting Rac1-mediated endosomal dynamics. LRRK2 also perturbs synaptic exocytosis through phosphorylation of N-ethylmaleimide-Sensitive Factor which upregulates SNARE disassembly. Furthermore, LRRK2 is highly expressed in dorsal striatal medium spiny neurons, the postsynaptic compartment of nigrostriatal pathway. G2019S mutation of LRRK2 lead to abnormally high activity of medium spiny neurons and morphological perturbations during development. Abnormal synaptogenesis and dopamine receptor activation in the developing medium spiny neurons mediated by dysfunctional protein kinase A was seen in LRRK2 R1441C mutation. These defects can permanently modify the circuit structure and function, predisposing the individuals to both motor and non-motor dysfunctions of Parkinson's disease. LRRK2 mutation-mediated endocytosis defects were noted predominantly in these medium spiny neurons, along with nigral dopaminergic neurons and not in cortical or hippocampal neurons. This suggests a heightened vulnerability in the endolysosomal system of nigrostriatal circuit for LRRK2 mutations.

Increased LRRK2 kinase activity mediated elevation of exocytosis may also be relevant for cell-to-cell transfer of misfolded alpha-synuclein. LRRK2 can selectively recruit to overloaded lysosomes and divert undegraded materials out of the kidney cells, along with secretion of alpha-synuclein from endosomes. Studies also demonstrate heightened uptake of alpha-synuclein fibrils through endocytosis in the presence of pathogenic LRRK2. However, LRRK2's role in prion-like spreading of alpha-synuclein remains speculative, until confirmation that similar mechanisms exist in neurons.

Clinical description and diagnosis of Parkinson's disease has changed little since James Parkinson's characterization of the disease two hundred years ago. In the nineteen sixties, identification of dopamine deficiency as the cause of motor abnormalities led to symptomatic relief for patients. Though some success has been noted with deep brain stimulation, we are still relying on symptomatic relief. The last three decades of basic research have enriched our understanding of Parkinson's disease's cellular and molecular mechanisms, bringing tangible hope for disease modifying treatment strategies. Identification of risk genes and conceptual shifts in our understanding through genetic models point to the endolysosomal system dysfunction as the key mediator of Parkinson's disease pathogenesis. Further strengthening this concept, Parkinson's disease pathogenesis appears to begin at synaptic terminals where endo and exocytotic machinery is most active and where alpha-synuclein and LRRK2 exert their


## effects through the endolysosomal system and vice-versa. Studies so far suggest that altered flux through the endolysosomal system in nigral dopaminergic neurons that have lesser threshold for degeneration is the key trigger for neurodegeneration. Moving forward, critical elucidation of the mechanisms behind sorting, trafficking, and recycling defects demands detailed studies of auxilin and other DNAJ family proteins, along with Synaptojanin-1, endophilin A, and the retromer complex. Studying these genes will also provide crucial insights into less explored roles of synaptic autophagy, axonal transport, and clathrin-independent endocytosis in Parkinson's disease. Recent surveys of Parkinson's disease patients note preservation of cognitive functioning as a major unmet need. Further investigation of GBA mutations implicated in Parkinson's disease is a promising avenue considering GBA's known involvement in cognitive disorders like Dementia with Lewy Bodies. Along with GBA, studying ATP13A2 and other lysosomal genes will enrich our understanding of lysosomal dysfunction, potentially bringing us closer to repurposing drugs used in Lysosomal Storage Disorders for Parkinson's disease. Affirming ongoing clinical trials targeting autophagy, alpha-synuclein, and LRRK2, an enhanced understanding of endolysosomal system-mediated pathogenesis will prove crucial in developing novel treatment strategies and diagnostic tools for Parkinson's disease.

effects through the E-L system and vice-versa. Studies so far suggest that altered flux through the E-L system in nigral dopaminergic neurons that have lesser threshold for degeneration is the key trigger for neurodegeneration. Moving forward, critical elucidation of the mechanisms behind sorting, trafficking, and recycling defects demands detailed studies of auxilin and other DNAJ family proteins, along with SYNJ1, endophilin A, and the retromer complex. Studying these genes will also provide crucial insights into less explored roles of synaptic autophagy, axonal transport, and clathrin-independent endocytosis in PD. Recent surveys of PD patients note preservation of cognitive functioning as a major unmet need. Further investigation of GBA mutations implicated in PD is a promising avenue considering GBA's known involvement in cognitive disorders like Dementia with Lewy Bodies. Along with GBA, studying ATP13A2 and other lysosomal genes will enrich our understanding of lysosomal dysfunction, potentially bringing us closer to repurposing drugs used in Lysosomal Storage Disorders for PD. Affirming ongoing clinical trials targeting autophagy, a-synuclein, and LRRK2, an enhanced understanding of E-L system-mediated pathogenesis will prove crucial in developing novel treatment strategies and diagnostic tools for PD.

P D Parkinson's disease

S Npc Substantia Nigra pars compacta

E-L

Endolysosomal

M six P

Mannose-six-phosphate

T G N

Trans-Golgi Network

C M E

Clathrin-Mediated Endocytosis

ESCRT

Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport

ILVs Interluminal Vesicles

MVBs Multivesicular Bodies

CCVs Clathrin Coated Vesicles

GAK

Cyclin G Associated Kinase

GBA

Glucosidase Beta Acid

D C Vs

Dense Core Vesicles

LRRK2

Leucine-rich repeat kinase two Parkinson's disease gene

PARK PRKN Parkin

SNCA Alpha-synuclein gene

G W A S Genome Wide Association Study

SVs Synaptic Vesicles

PI four comma five P two Phosphatidylinositol four comma five-bisphosphate

L-dopa Levodopa

K O Knockout

RME-eight Receptor Mediated Endocytosis eight

SYNJ1 slash SynJ one Synaptojanin-one

PIPs Phosphoinositide Phosphates

ATP13A2 ATPase cation transporting thirteen A2

PINK1 P T E N Induced Putative Kinase one

V P S Vacuolar Protein Sorting

LAMP two a Lysosome-Associated Membrane Glycoprotein two

AMPA a-Amino-three-hydroxy-five-methyl-four-isoxazolepropionic acid

G D Gaucher Disease

Gcase one Glucocerebrosidase one

GlcCer Glucosylceramide

SNARE Soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor Attachment protein Receptors

HSPGs Heparan Sulfate Proteoglycans

USP nineteen Ubiquitin Carboxyl-Terminal Hydrolase nineteen

MAPK slash ERK Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase slash Extracellular Signal-Regulated Kinase

GTPase Guanosine Triphosphatase

PI four comma five P two Phosphatidylinositol four comma five-bisphosphate

Hsc seventy Heat Shock Cognate seventy

SRNA small interfering Ribonucleic acid iPSCs induced Pluripotent Stem Cells

HSP forty Heat Shock Protein forty

MSNs Medium Spiny Neurons