## Plant Biotechnology Journal

Role of MdERF3 and MdERF118 natural variations in apple flesh firmness/crispness retainability and development of QTL-based genomics-assisted prediction


## Summary

Retention of flesh texture attributes during cold storage is critical for the long-term maintenance of fruit quality. The genetic variations determining flesh firmness and crispness retainability are not well understood. The objectives of this study are to identify gene markers based on quantitative trait loci and to develop genomics-assisted prediction models for apple flesh firmness and crispness retainability. Phenotype data of two thousand six hundred sixty-four hybrids derived from three Malus domestica cultivars and a Malus asiatica cultivar were collected in twenty sixteen and twenty seventeen. The phenotype segregated considerably with high broad-sense heritability of eighty-three point eight five percent and eighty-three point six four percent for flesh firmness and crispness retainability, respectively. Fifty-six candidate genes were predicted from the sixty-two quantitative trait loci identified using bulked segregant analysis and RNA-seq. The genotype effects of the markers designed on each candidate gene were estimated. The genomics-predicted values were obtained using pyramiding marker genotype effects and overall mean phenotype values. Fivefold cross-validation revealed that the prediction accuracy was zero point five five four one and zero point six zero one eight for retainability of flesh firmness and crispness, respectively. An eight-base pair deletion in the MdERF3 promoter disrupted MdDOF5.3 binding, reduced MdERF3 expression, relieved the inhibition on MdPGLR3, MdPME2, and MdACO4 expression, and ultimately decreased flesh firmness and crispness retainability. A three-base pair deletion in the MdERF118 promoter decreased its expression by disrupting the binding of MdRAVL1, which increased MdPGLR3 and MdACO4 expression and reduced flesh firmness and crispness retainability. These results provide insights regarding the genetic variation network regulating flesh firmness and crispness retainability, and the genomics-assisted prediction models can assist in apple breeding.


## Introduction

Fruit softening after ripening is important for plant survival and reproduction. However, optimal flesh firmness and crispness are important fruit quality traits determining consumer choice. The retention of these texture attributes during cold storage is critical for long-term maintenance of fruit quality. Although many quantitative trait loci have been identified and several genes have been reported to be involved in fruit storability, molecular insights regarding fruit firmness and crispness retention are currently limited.

Fruit firmness and crispness are quantitatively inherited and are genetically controlled by polygenes with minor effects. In apple, a number of quantitative trait loci for fruit firmness and flesh texture were repeatedly mapped on chromosomes one, five, six, eight, ten, twelve, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, and seventeen, which explained ten to forty-nine percent phenotypic variance.

Post-harvest fruit softening, which counteracts flesh firmness and crispness retention, is a complex physiological process involving the biosynthesis of or response to phytohormones and the degradation of cytoskeletons such as polysaccharide. Ethylene biosynthesis is generally considered a primary factor leading to fruit softening. One-aminocyclopropane-one-carboxylic acid synthase and one-aminocyclopropane-one-carboxylic acid oxidase are the two well-studied ethylene production-related genes. Quantitative trait loci-based markers on MdACO1 and MdACS1 have been shown to be responsible for apple fruit firmness and shelf life. However, the markers on MdACS1 and MdACO1 explained only eight point three to eleven point four percent of phenotype variance, indicating that other genes may contribute to the overall effect of low ethylene production in certain apple lines.

The rapid increase in internal ethylene concentration triggers the transition from the initial slow softening phase to the rapid softening phase in apple. A functional single-nucleotide polymorphism marker on polygalacturonase gene MdPG1, which explains up to ten point seven percent phenotypic variance, was developed from a quantitative trait locus for fruit post-harvest firmness. Flesh firmness loss is usually associated with mealiness. The MdPG1 also contributed most to apple flesh mealiness. A significant locus spanning pectin methylesterase was associated with apple fruit crispness and mealiness in a genome-wide association study. Apples of cultivar 'Scifresh' soften slowly because of the relatively low MdPME and MdPG activities throughout fruit development and ripening.

In addition to the genes for ethylene biosynthesis and pectin degradation, many transcription factors are involved in fine controlling fruit firmness and crispness. Ethylene response factors, MdERF2 and MdERF3, should be MdERF1A in NCBI, bind to the MdACS1 promoter and oppositely regulate its transcription during post-harvest ripening in apple. Nevertheless, the genetic regulatory network mediated by these genes and the relationship between them were not clear.

In the last decade, empirical marker-assisted selection for apple crispness has been practically used in breeding programmes, enabling breeders to design the perfect hybrid cross and to select the best seedlings from large populations. Breeders have noticed that the efficiency of marker-assisted selection is often not satisfactory for traits involving many loci with minor effects. Genomic selection emerged as an innovative paradigm twenty years ago in animal breeding and was soon adopted and rapidly studied in fruit plants. In apple, genomic selection or genomic prediction was pioneered by Kumar et al. in twenty twelve and has been used in simulative selections for fruit quality traits, harvest date, and scab resistance.

Pure GS estimates additive effects and neglects non-additive allelic effects and non-allelic epistasis. For outcrossing species, these non-additive effects were, however, important for the improvement of various traits. A hierarchical epistasis of MdSAUR37/MdPP2CH/MdALMTII was identified to control fruit malate content. To link MAS and GS, an additive Bayesian QTL analyses model was developed for apple fruit firmness, the GS accuracy (zero point five seven to zero point nine four) was higher than that of genomic best linear unbiased prediction model (zero point seven two to zero point seven seven). These data drew attention to QTL-based GS, which is sometimes called genomics-assisted prediction. Compared with map-based QTL mapping and GWAS, bulked segregant analysis via sequencing is considered as a cost-efficient QTL detection approach and has been effectively used in apple.

The objective of the present study was to develop GAP models for flesh firmness and crispness retainability. Towards this, QTLs were identified from three apple F one hybrid populations using bulked segregant analysis via sequencing approach. To convert significant QTL-based markers to diagnostic markers, candidate genes were predicted from QTL intervals, assisted by using RNA sequencing and parental re-sequencing. Then, the allelic variations in candidate genes were validated to confirm the function of the variations. The results can facilitate dissecting the genetic variation network and obtaining functional markers for apple flesh firmness and crispness retainability.


## Results

Segregation and correlation of flesh firmness or crispness at harvest and post-harvest

Both the initial flesh firmness and the crispness of apples at harvest segregated extensively with a Gaussian distribution within the three populations, implying a minor-effect polygenic control of these two traits. The broad-sense heritability H squared was seventy-five point two four to eighty-three point zero six percent and eighty-six point nine one to ninety-four point four three percent for the initial flesh firmness and crispness, respectively. Similarly, the H squared was seventy-five point zero four to eighty-three point eight five percent and seventy-five point eight seven to eighty-three point six four percent for retainability of flesh firmness and crispness, respectively. However, the frequency distributions of retainability of flesh firmness and crispness were not Gaussian. The majority of hybrids lost flesh firmness and crispness within one or two months. The frequency of hybrids with long flesh firmness (greater than or equal to seven kilograms per square centimeter) and crispness (greater than or equal to zero point seven kilograms per square centimeter) retainability was higher in the population of 'Zisai Pearl' by 'Red Fuji' than the other two.

The Pearson's correlation coefficient was highest between flesh crispness and firmness retainability (zero point eight zero two four; N equals two thousand six hundred fifty one), followed by that between initial flesh firmness and crispness (zero point five eight nine two; N equals two thousand five hundred seven). The correlations between the initial flesh firmness or crispness at harvest and the corresponding flesh firmness or crispness retainability after cold storage were relatively low (zero point three three nine two to zero point four six nine two). The hybrids with long flesh firmness retainability did not generally have the same or longer flesh crispness retainability. Among the two hundred seventeen hybrids with six to seven months long flesh firmness retainability, one hundred forty (sixty-four point five percent) had the same or longer flesh crispness retainability. However, among the one hundred fifty-seven hybrids with six months or longer flesh crispness retainability, one hundred forty (eighty-nine point two percent) showed six to seven months flesh firmness retainability. These data indicated that long retainability of flesh firmness was likely a prerequisite for flesh crispness retainability.


## Pattern of flesh firmness and crispness at harvest and post-harvest

Regarding the changes in flesh firmness and crispness during cold storage, three extremity dynamics were distinctly observed. Type I: acceptable flesh firmness (seven point zero kilograms per square centimeter) or crispness (zero point seven kilograms per square centimeter) lost already at harvest. Type II: acceptable flesh firmness or crispness maintained until the sixth month after a rapid softening during the first month of cold storage. Type III: acceptable flesh firmness or crispness maintained after the sixth months of cold storage with constantly slow softening rate. Ethylene production in type I hybrids was higher than that in types II and III during cold storage, whereas type III hybrids produced lowest level of ethylene. These suggested that low ethylene emission was associated with flesh firmness and crispness retainability.


## QTL identification using BSA-seq

By the three segregant bulks from the three phenotype types of flesh firmness retainability, ten, five and seventeen significant QTLs for flesh firmness retainability were identified from bulk pairs of type III versus type I, type III versus type II, and type II versus type I, respectively. These QTLs were located on chromosomes three, eleven, twelve, fifteen, sixteen and seventeen. Of these QTLs, F-F zero three point two and F-H zero three point one overlapped at twenty-eight point five to twenty-nine point eight megabases of chromosome three, while F-Z sixteen point one, F-F sixteen point one, F-H sixteen point one and F-H sixteen point two overlapped at thirty-eight point four to thirty-nine point five megabases of chromosome sixteen. From the three bulks of flesh crispness retainability, eight, eleven, and eleven QTLs were mapped from bulk pairs of type III versus type I, type II versus type I, and type III versus type II, respectively. These QTLs were


## Months after harvest

mapped on chromosomes two, three, six, ten, eleven, fourteen and sixteen. Of these QTLs, C-H zero three point one, C-F zero three point two and C-F zero three point three overlapped at twenty-eight point four to twenty-nine point seven megabases of chromosome three. Similarly, C-F sixteen point one, C-H sixteen point one and C-H sixteen point three overlapped at thirty-eight point four to thirty-nine point five megabases of chromosome sixteen. In addition, several QTLs for flesh firmness retainability on chromosome three and sixteen overlapped with those for flesh crispness retainability, such as F-F zero three point two, F-H zero three point one, C-H zero three point one, C-F zero three point two, and C-F zero three point three at twenty-eight point four to twenty-nine point eight megabases of chromosome three. The overlap of these QTLs indicated the genetic linkage between flesh firmness and crispness retainability.


## Genomics-assisted prediction of apple storability one thousand twenty-five

Prediction of candidate genes for flesh firmness and crispness retainability at post-harvest

By the RNA-seq analysis, forty-seven thousand two hundred twenty-two unigenes were identified, of which three thousand seven hundred fifty differentially expressed genes were detected two thousand twenty The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley and Sons Ltd., nineteen, one thousand twenty-two to one thousand thirty-seven


## Genomics-assisted prediction of apple storability one thousand twenty-seven

P is less than point zero five, P is less than point zero one. between the three types of flesh firmness and crispness retainability. As expected, a clear transcriptomic signature of both the flesh firmness type one and the flesh crispness type one hybrids was the two point one eight- to fifty-six point one nine-fold high expression of cell wall degradation-related genes. These genes included MdBGL, MdBGAL, and MdBGLU. On the contrary, the expression of four cell wall-associated genes was significantly higher (two point two six- to nine point one zero-fold difference) in flesh crispness retainable type three and type two hybrids than in crispness unretainable type one hybrids, that is MdPGIP twelve, MdGLCAT fourteen B, MdGWD one, and a cellulolyase gene.

Several ethylene-related DEGs were detected between flesh firmness type three or type two and type one hybrids. The expression of MdZAT twelve, MdERF one ten, and MdACO one was zero point zero one- to zero point four eight-fold lower in type two and type three hybrids. Similarly, the expression of MdACO two, MdACO three, MdEIN three and MdERF ninety-eight was significantly low (zero point zero one- to zero point four seven-fold difference) in flesh crispness retainable type three and type two hybrids. A group of ethylene response genes, however, was expressed more actively (two point zero two- to two thousand five hundred fourteen point five five-fold difference) in firmness type three and type two hybrids than that in firmness type one hybrids, such as MdAGL twenty-four, MdACO four, MdACO four-like, and MdALD one.

High expression (two point nine five- to thirty-seven point one four-fold difference) of some auxin-related genes, MdSAUR seventy-one, MdSAUR forty, and MdARGOS, was observed in flesh firmness type one hybrids. In addition, a group of genes involved in abscisic acid and gibberellic acid synthesis, transport, and response were differentially expressed between hybrid types of flesh firmness or crispness. There were also DEGs detected between flesh firmness type three and type two hybrids, such as jasmonate-related genes. In summary, the above DEGs indicated the cell wall degradation, ethylene biosynthesis and signalling of ethylene, and other phytohormones were involved in flesh firmness and crispness retainability.

To predict candidate genes associated with flesh firmness and crispness retainability from QTL regions, one thousand eight hundred sixty-five and one thousand two hundred seventy-eight genes were downloaded from the intervals of the sixty-two QTLs for flesh firmness or crispness retainability, respectively. Then, eighty-seven and fifty-eight genes were selected according to the parental re-sequencing and RNA-seq data. These genes were functionally associated with fruit ripening and senescence. From the QTL regions of F-F zero three point one and C-F zero three point two, and F-Z sixteen point two, two ERF genes, MdERF three and MdERF one eighteen, were predicted as candidate genes for both flesh firmness and crispness retainability. MdERF three and MdERF one eighteen were also DEGs.


## Validation of candidate genes MdERF three and MdERF one eighteen, and their interaction

An eight-base pair deletion (CTTAACTG) from negative three hundred twenty-three to negative three hundred thirty prior to the ATG codon of MdERF three of 'Red Fuji' was detected and validated using Sanger sequencing. The Del three hundred twenty-three genotypes of 'Red Fuji' and 'Zisai Pearl' were heterozygous Del three hundred twenty-three:del three hundred twenty-three and homologous Del three hundred twenty-three:Del three hundred twenty-three, respectively. Bioinformatic analysis predicted that this deletion might damage the DOF five point three binding motif.

The expression of MdERF three in 'Red Fuji' and three flesh firmness and crispness retainable hybrids (zero one-zero sixty-seven, eleven-one sixty-nine, and seventeen-one thirty-eight) with Del three hundred twenty-three:del three hundred twenty-three genotype was significantly higher (two point one- to two point nine-fold difference) than that in 'Zisai Pearl' and three flesh firmness and crispness non-retainable hybrids (twelve-one ninety, seventeen-one zero three, and fourteen-one zero seven) with Del three hundred twenty-three:Del three hundred twenty-three genotype during six to eighteen weeks of cold storage.

Beta-Glucuronidase staining of transient transformed tobacco leaves and the relative expres- sion of GUS in MdERFpro-Fdel three hundred twenty-three:GUS and MdERF three pro-Fdel three hundred twenty-three- two:GUS indicated that both the presence of Del three hundred twenty-three from 'Zisai Pearl' and truncating off the corresponding fragment from 'Red Fuji' destroyed the promoter activity of MdERF three. In transgenic apple calli, the relative promoter activity was signifi- cantly lower in MdERF three pro-F:GUS (Del three hundred twenty-three) than in MdERF three pro-F:GUS (del three hundred twenty-three).

Bioinformatics analysis predicted that MdERF3 may bind to the GCC-box or DRE motif on the promoter of genes such as MdPGLR3, MdPME2 and MdACO4. MdPGLR3, MdPME2 and MdACO4 were predicted as candidate genes from QTLs F-F zero three point four, C-F zero two point one and F-Z sixteen point one, respectively, and all these three genes were DEGs for flesh firmness and crispness retainability. Yeast one hybrid assay confirmed that MdERF3 efficiently bound to the promoters of MdPGLR3, MdPME2 and MdACO4. The relative expression of MdPGLR3, MdPME2 and MdACO4 was significantly inhibited in MdERF3 overexpressing lines, but was induced significantly in RNAi lines. These data demonstrated that MdERF3 might negatively regulate the transcription of MdPGLR3, MdPME2 and MdACO4.

MdDOF five point three was predicted to be located near QTL F-Z eleven point one. Yeast one hybrid revealed that MdDOF five point three bound to the promoter of MdERF3 of 'Red Fuji' containing the CTTAACTG element, but did not bind to MdERF3 of 'Red Fuji'. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay further confirmed the interaction between MdDOF five point three and the promoter of MdERF3 containing the CTTAACTG element. In thirty-five S: MdDOF five point three and MdERF3 pro-F: GUS co-transformed tobacco leaves, the MdERF3 promoter activity was higher than that co-transformed with a M d E R F three pr a-F: GUS. These results indicated that MdERF3 completely perturbed the binding of MdDOF five point three to the CTTAACTG motif of MdERF3 promoter.

MdERF3 was then transiently overexpressed via Agrobacterium-mediated infiltration or silenced via pTRV virus-induced gene silencing. Compared to that with the PRI one hundred one empty vector transformants control, a significant increase in MdERF3 expression and distinct changes in fruit skin colour were observed in 'Golden Delicious' apples five days after transient transformation with PRI-MdERF3. However, both flesh firmness and crispness of PRI-MdERF3-transformed apples were relatively lower than that of PRI one hundred one control, which may be attributed to natural fruit senescence. The apples transformed with pTRV-MdERF3 displayed more yellowing of the skin, reduced MdERF3 expression, and an especially lower flesh firmness and crispness five days after infiltration. These data further confirmed that MdERF3 contributed to post-harvest flesh firmness/crispness retainability.

A three base pair deletion GTT at negative two hundred twenty-nine to negative two hundred thirty-one upstream of the ATG codon of MdERF one hundred eighteen was detected in 'Zisai Pearl', which disrupted the RAVL one binding CAACA motif and reduced the expression of MdERF one hundred eighteen in flesh firmness and crispness non-retainable Del two hundred twenty-nine:del two hundred twenty-nine genotypes. The GUS staining intensity, GUS gene expression in tobacco, and transgenic apple calli indicated that the presence of Del two hundred twenty-nine or truncating off the corresponding motif reduced the promoter activity of MdERF one hundred eighteen. Yeast one hybrid and transgenic apple calli lines confirmed that MdERF one hundred eighteen might negatively regulate the transcription of MdPGLR3 and MdACO4.

MdRAVL one was predicted from QTL F-Z sixteen point two. Yeast one hybrid, electrophoretic mobility shift assay and transient co-transformed tobacco showed that MdRAVL one bound to the promoter of MdERF one hundred eighteen but not MdERF one hundred eighteen-D. 'Golden Delicious' apples transiently overexpressing or virus-induced gene silencing MdERF one hundred eighteen further confirmed the contribution of MdERF one hundred eighteen to flesh firmness or crispness retainability.

The yeast two hybrid assay revealed the protein-protein interaction between MdERF3 and MdERF one hundred eighteen. Then, a bimolecular fluorescence complementation assay in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves further verified that MdERF3 interacted with MdERF one hundred eighteen in the nucleus.


## QTL-based GAP modelling and simulative selection

An SNP marker was selected from a candidate gene predicted from each of the fifty-six QTLs, including MdERF3 and MdERF one hundred eighteen. The genotypes of hybrids in the training population for the fifty-six QTL-based markers were listed in tables. The marker effects varied from zero point one five five months to two point five nine months, and from zero point two one months to three point two four months for flesh firmness and crispness retainability, respectively. The additive, for example SNP one three five seven nine four one eight for crispness


## Genomics-assisted prediction of apple storability ten twenty-nine

retainability, or complete dominant, for example SNP nine four zero three three one eight for crispness retainability, allelic effects were less common than the partial dominant allelic effect, for example SNP nine one two seven two six nine and SNP three eight five seven three four six one for both firmness and crispness retainability.

The genomics-predicted value of flesh firmness retainability of four hundred seventy-three hybrids and genomics-predicted value of flesh crispness retainability of three hundred ninety-four hybrids were shown in tables. Relatively high prediction accuracy was obtained as zero point five seven one two and zero point six five eight five for the retainability of flesh firmness and crispness, respectively. The fivefold cross-validation exhibited an average prediction accuracy of zero point five five four one and zero point six zero one eight for flesh firmness and crispness retainability, respectively. In a simulative selection, when flesh firmness retainability genomics-predicted value criterion was set as five point zero months, the selection rate was two point five four percent and the efficiency was one hundred percent, which indicated that the observed phenotype value of all the twelve selected hybrids was equal to or longer than five point zero months. When the genomics-predicted value criterion for flesh crispness retainability was set as five point zero months, the selection rate was three point four eight percent and the efficiency was sixty-four point two nine percent.


## Discussion

Flesh firmness retainability and crispness retainability are the critical properties affecting fruit cold storability. The heritability of flesh firmness and crispness retainability was as high as eighty-three point eight five percent and eighty-three point six four percent, respectively, which was slightly higher than the estimate seventy percent for firmness and crispness at harvest or after two month cold storage. Flesh firmness and crispness retention can be prolonged if the initial values of firmness and crispness at harvest are high or if the flesh softening rates during storage are low, or both. In this study, unlike flesh firmness and crispness at harvest, the segregation of flesh firmness and crispness retainability did not displayed Gaussian distribution, a large proportion of hybrids lost acceptable flesh firmness and crispness one month post-harvest.

According to the Q.T.L. effects in tomato, flesh firmness loss was not predicted by firmness at harvest. The phenotype correlations between the initial flesh firmness and crispness and their retainability were also relatively low in this study. In a two-year trial, apple fruit firmness after storage correlated positively with both firmness at harvest and changes in firmness during storage; however, no obvious correlation was observed between changes in firmness and the initial firmness at harvest. A major Q.T.L. for apple fruit firmness retention after storage was identified on chromosome ten; however, a gene encoding E.R.F. was predicted as the candidate rather than the frequently detected Md.P.G. one in other populations, indicating that the genetics of the trait firmness retention might differ from that of initial firmness at harvest. In a Meta.Q.T.L. analysis, of the six Meta.Q.T.L.s for apple fruit texture attributes, two were for both firmness at harvest and firmness after two months cold storage, one for both softening and firmness after two months, and three for solely softening, firmness at harvest, and firmness after two months, respectively. This indicated that these three texture attributes were mutually related but partially independent. High initial flesh firmness or crispness is necessary but insufficient for long-term firmness and crispness retainability. In this study, several new

Quantitative trait loci for flesh firmness and crispness retainability were identified on chromosomes two, eleven, twelve and seventeen, which were previously considered as always having low values for segregating quantitative trait loci on these chromosomes.

The four functional markers, Md.A.C.S. one, Md.A.C.O. one, Md.P.G. one and an expansin gene, Md.Exp. seven, for fruit firmness and crispness in apple have been well studied to dissect phenotypic variability among cultivars and hybrids. Unfortunately, the empirical predictive power of these four functional markers were limited, with fifteen percent of the observed variation in initial firmness and eighteen percent in softening rate; therefore, their large-scale use for marker-assisted selection was doubtful. The genotypes of commonly used markers on Md.A.C.S. one and Md.A.C.O. one did not segregate in the 'Zisai Pearl' x 'Red

Fuji' population, which offered opportunity to map more quantitative trait loci. Ethylene production, however, varied with types of firmness and crispness retainability. R.N.A.-seq data showed that the expression levels of Md.A.C.O. one, Md.A.C.O. two, Md.A.C.O. three and some ethylene response genes were higher in flesh firmness and crispness unretainable type one hybrids.

Flesh firmness and crispness are usually measured simultaneously; however, they should be two closely relevant but clearly distinct texture attributes. One evidence for the close relatedness was that the phenotypic correlation coefficient between the flesh firmness retainability and crispness retainability was as high as zero point eight zero two four, which was inconsistent with the previous report. Another evidence was that the overlapping quantitative trait loci on chromosomes three and sixteen associated with flesh firmness and crispness retainability. The third evidence was that variations in Md.E.R.F. three and Md.E.R.F. one one eight affected both flesh firmness and crispness. On the other hand, retainability of flesh firmness was likely a prerequisite for flesh crispness retainability. Additionally, many quantitative trait loci were identified independently for flesh firmness retainability and crispness retainability, which manifested the distinctness of these two flesh texture attributes.

The majority of consumers prefer crisp apples to firm ones. Apple cultivars with relatively high flesh crispness but low firmness, such as 'Honeycrisp', are currently commercially successful and are expected to remain so in the future. The apple expansin genes, MdEXPDCA1, MdEXPA2, MdEXPA3 and MdEXPA8 were considered markers for flesh crispness retention during cold storage. We observed that the expression of Beta-Gal genes, MdBGLs and MdBGLU, was significantly high in flesh firmness and crispness unretainable hybrids, which was consistent with the results of a previous report. These data indicated that flesh crispness retainability is a more crucial fruit quality attribute than flesh firmness retainability and that genomics-assisted selection for good flesh crispness retainability may also inadvertently select for good flesh firmness retainability.

Unlike the QTLs on chromosomes ten and fifteen for fruit firmness at harvest, chromosomes three and sixteen were 'QTL hotspots' for apple flesh firmness and crispness retainability, which is consistent with the results of previous reports. The markers SNP two six six eight four six eight zero and SNP three four seven three two zero three two on chromosome three, and SNP three eight five seven three four six one, SNP three zero five nine one two nine, and SNP nine one two seven two six nine on chromosome sixteen accounted for relatively large effects for both flesh firmness and crispness retainability.

RNA-seq enriched a large group of ethylene synthesis-related and cell wall degradation-related genes in DEGs between flesh firmness and crispness retainable and unretainable samples, which was consistent with previous reports.

In addition to these functional genes, many ethylene receptors and signalling genes were involved in regulating fruit firmness, such as MdEIN3, MdERF1, MdERF2 and MdERF4. Here, we observed that several ethylene-responsive genes were up-regulated in firmness and crispness retainable apples. As expected, the allelic variations on QTL-identified MdERF3 and MdERF118 were detected and were validated to affect flesh firmness and crispness retainability. These two allelic variations were considered diagnostic markers, which is consistent with QTL-derived ERF genes for apple fruit firmness retention. MdERF3 contains an ethylene-responsive element-binding factor-associated amphiphilic repression motif, and thus may function as negative regulator of MdPGLR3, MdPME2 and MdACO4 expression. MdERF118 also inhibited MdPGLR3 and MdACO4 expression by directly binding to their promoters; however, MdERF118 does not contain an EAR motif, which is similar to SlERF6 in tomato. SlERF6 negatively regulates fruit maturity and does not contain the EAR motif. The protein-protein interaction between MdERF3 and MdERF118 rendered the genetic variation network more complex.

GAP models for apple flesh firmness and crispness retainability were developed and were efficiently used in simulative selection. Fivefold cross-validation showed the prediction accuracy was zero point five five four one and zero point six zero one eight for the retainability of flesh firmness and crispness, respectively. The predictability of these models was not only better than that of the activator-depleted substrate model, but also better than that of pure GS by ridge regression BLUP, the accuracy of which was more than zero point four for apple firmness after storage and was zero point zero eight to zero point four five for changes in fruit firmness. The improvement in predictability of the GAP models may be attributed to the taking into account non-additive allelic effects. Additive, dominant, and even over-dominant non-allelic epistasis or interactions among

One thousand thirty-two Bei Wu et al.

QTLs or candidate genes for fruit firmness were detected in tomato. Dominant or partially dominant allelic effects were common in this study for apple flesh firmness and crispness retainability.


## Conclusion

Fifty-six candidate genes for apple flesh firmness and crispness retainability were predicted from the intervals of sixty-two QTLs. GAP models were developed using genotype effects of the QTL-based marker, and the prediction accuracy of the GAP models was zero point five seven one two and zero point six five eight five for the retainability of flesh firmness and crispness, respectively. On the QTL hotspot of chromosome three, an eight-base pair deletion in the MdERF-three promoter perturbed the binding of MdDOF-five point three, reduced MdERF-three expression, relieved the inhibition on MdPGLR-three, MdPME-two, and MdACO-four expression, and ultimately decreased the flesh firmness and crispness retainability. From a QTL on chromosome sixteen, a three-base pair deletion in the promoter of MdERF-one hundred eighteen decreased its expression by perturbing the binding of MdRAVL-one, which increased MdPGLR-three and MdACO-four expression and reduced flesh firmness and crispness retainability. The results implied a sophisticated genetic variation network regulating flesh firmness and crispness retainability. The GAP models can be potentially applied in apple breeding.


## Experimental procedures

Plant materials and growth conditions

The plant materials were two thousand six hundred sixty-four bi-parental hybrids derived from 'Zisai Pearl' x 'Red Fuji' (one thousand one hundred eighty-five), 'Zisai Pearl' x 'Golden Delicious' (nine hundred sixty-seven), and 'Jonathan' x 'Golden Delicious' (five hundred twelve). 'Zisai Pearl' is a Chinese apple cultivar that belongs to Malus asiatica Nakai., while the other three parents are commercial cultivars belonging to M. domestica Borkh. All the hybrids were grown at a density of two point five meters times zero point five meters under conventional management and pest control in the Fruit Experimental Station, China Agricultural University (Changping District, Beijing, China).

In two thousand sixteen to two thousand seventeen, fruit samples were harvested at commercial maturity based on fruit background colour and starch degradation (selected at seven on a scale of one to ten). After harvest, apples were cold-stored at one degree Celsius with negative ninety-five percent relative humidity in polyethylene bags. Flesh firmness and crispness of three apples per hybrid (all two thousand six hundred sixty-four hybrids if fruit samples were available) were measured at zero to sixth month with one month interval. Apples from hybrids with year-stable extremity phenotypes (randomly five hybrids from each phenotype type) were used for ethylene measurement in two thousand seventeen. Flesh tissue of 'Zisai Pearl', 'Red Fuji' and hybrids with phenotype type I (twelve-one hundred ninety, seventeen-one hundred three, and fourteen-one hundred seven) and type II (zero one-zero sixty-seven, eleven-one hundred sixty-nine, and seventeen-one hundred thirty-eight) of flesh firmness retainability were used for qRT-PCR analysis for MdERF-three and MdERF-one hundred eighteen relative expression. The fruit flesh and leaf samples were collected, immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at negative eighty degrees Celsius until use.

Apple calli induced from the flesh of the cultivar 'Orin' were sub-cultured every three weeks on Murashige and Skoog medium used for Agrobacterium tumefaciens infection.


## Measurements of flesh firmness and crispness and the retainability

To evaluate the ability of flesh firmness and crispness retention during cold storage, the maximum time (months as unit) till which the apples maintained acceptable flesh firmness (greater than or equal to seven point zero kilograms per square centimeter) and crispness (greater than or equal to zero point seven kilograms per square centimeter) was recorded as the retainability of flesh firmness and crispness, respectively. Flesh firmness and crispness were measured with a computer-controlled texture analyser TAXT. The diameter of the penetrating probe was zero point two centimeters, and the penetration depth was zero point five centimeters. Punctures were performed on the maximum equator of each apple. Three biological replicates were performed, and each included at least three technical replicates.


## Measurements of ethylene production

To determine ethylene emission, each fruit was weighed and enclosed in a gas-tight container and incubated for two hours at room temperature (twenty to twenty-five degrees Celsius). One milliliter of gas was sampled from the headspace in the container using a BD syringe. The ethylene concentration of gas samples was measured with a gas chromatography equipped with a flame ionization detector. The fruit ethylene production was calculated as described previously.


## BSA-seq and QTL identification

As hybrids with longer flesh firmness and crispness retainability over six months can only be detected in the population of 'Zisai Pearl' x 'Red Fuji', hybrids from this population were used to make BSA bulks. Thirty hybrids were randomly chosen from each phenotype type: type I, type II, and type III for flesh firmness or crispness retainability, respectively. Totally six phenotype extremity bulks were constructed. Genomic DNA from each hybrid was extracted from young leaves and pooled. Each bulked DNA sample was sequenced to obtain thirty times genome coverage using a paired-end one hundred fifty-base pair read strategy. The parental cultivars have been re-sequenced previously. The re-sequencing data were processed, and QTLs were identified using the BSATOS software package.


## RNA-seq

RNA-seq was performed to explore DEGs between phenotype types of flesh firmness and crispness retainability during cold storage. Apples of three hybrids (as three biological replicates) from each phenotype type, three, two, and one of flesh firmness or crispness retainability were respectively sampled at zero, six, twelve, and eighteen weeks of cold storage. Totally, seventy-two samples were collected. The Illumina HiSeq two thousand platform was used to generate one hundred base pair paired-end reads. Bioinformatic analysis of RNA-seq data was performed as previously described. DEGs were determined by using the false discovery rate less than zero point zero five and the fold change threshold greater than two point zero.


## Candidate gene prediction

To develop potential diagnostic markers, candidate genes associated with flesh firmness and crispness retainability were predicted by using multi-omics data. Genes were downloaded from the intervals of the QTLs for flesh firmness or crispness retainability, respectively. SNPs and insertion/deletion variations in these genes were called using parental re-sequencing data. Of these genes, those with SNPs or insertions and deletions that did not affect the cis-element on the upstream sequence or the functional domain on the coding region were excluded. The genes which expression was not detectable, in addition to the genes with SNPs or insertions and deletions only in the promoter but that were not included in the DEGs, were excluded from further analysis.


## Genomic DNA extraction, RNA extraction and qRT-PCR assay

Genomic DNA of young leaves and total RNA of apple flesh or apple calli samples were extracted using the modified CTAB method as previously described. cDNA was synthesized using a c-DNA synthesis kit. The primers were designed according to the sequence on apple genome with premier software. The qRT-PCR analysis was performed using the ABI PRISM seventy-five hundred real-time PCR system. The gene encoding apple actin was used as the internal control. Three biological and three technical replicates, three times three, were performed. The primer sequences are listed in Table S16.


## Functional validation of candidate genes

GUS analysis

To test whether the allelic variations upstream of MdERF3 and MdERF118 coding sequences may affect its promoter activity, two thousand base pair promoter fragments were amplified using PCR from the genomic DNA of 'Zisai Pearl' and 'Red Fuji'. After Sanger sequencing, the reporter constructs containing the promoter sequences of MdERF3 and MdERF118, two thousand base pairs upstream of the start, ATG codon, using restriction enzyme sites SalI and EcoRI, were prepared as previously described. The coding sequences of MdDof5.3 or MdRAVL1 was introduced into the pRI101 vector using restriction enzyme sites, SalI and BamHI for MdDof5.3, BamHI and XholI for MdRAVL1, to generate the effector constructs. The reporter and effector vectors were constructed and injected into tobacco leaves. After three days infection, the transgenic leaves were dyed using the GUS reporter gene staining kit in three biological replicates and four technical replicates. All primer sequences for vector construction are listed in Table S16.


## Transient overexpression and VIGS

A six hundred ninety base pair MdERF3 and a one thousand thirty-two base pair MdERF118 coding sequences fragments were cloned from 'Golden Delicious' into the EcoRI/Xholl and EcoRI/KpnI sites of the pTRV2 virus vector as previously described. A. tumefaciens cells harbouring the resultant plasmids were suspended in infiltration buffer supplemented with one hundred fifty millimeter acetosyringone. The inoculum preparations were adjusted to O-D six hundred equals one point zero. A mixture of A. tumefaciens cells harbouring pTRV1 and pTRV2 derivatives, one to one ratio, was infiltrated into 'Golden Delicious' apple fruit, one hundred forty days after anthesis. The complete MdERF3 and MdERF118 coding sequences c-DNA sequences were amplified and individually cloned into the NdeI/EcoRI and SalI/BamHI sites of the PRI101 vector, followed by infiltration into 'Golden Delicious' apple fruit. The assays were performed with at least six fruit for each vector, and the experiments were repeated at least three times. The primer pairs used are listed in Table S16.


## Apple calli transformation

To determine the impact of the allelic variations in the upstream regions of MdERF3 and MdERF118 on promoter activity, genetic constructs with the promoters of MdERF3 and MdERF118, and also their coding sequences, respectively, plus a GUS reporter, were prepared using the one-step seamless cloning kit. These included MdERF3 pro-F:GUS, Del three hundred twenty-three,

MdERF3 pro-F:GUS, del three hundred twenty-three, MdERF118 pro-Z:GUS, Del two hundred twenty-nine, and MdERF118 pro-Z:GUS, del two hundred twenty-nine. All constructs were transiently transformed into apple calli, from hypanthium of 'Orin' cultivar, using the method described by Jia et al. The complete MdERF3 and MdERF118 coding sequences c-DNA sequences were also amplified and cloned into the NdeI/EcoRI and SalI/BamHI sites of the PRI101 vector, respectively. Partial MdERF3 and MdERF118 coding sequences sequences were cloned using the restriction enzyme sites XbaI/ SalI, EcoRI/SalI, and XbaI/SalI, KpnI/EcoRI of the RNAi vector. The primer pairs used are listed in Table S16.


## Y one H assay

The CDS of MdERF three and MdERF one hundred eighteen were ligated into the PJG four dash five vector in restriction enzyme sites Eco R one and Xho one. MdPME two, MdPGLR three and MdACO four were ligated into the Placzi vector in restriction enzyme sites Eco R one and Xho one, Kpn one and Xho one, and Kpn one and Xho one, respectively. The CDS of MdDof five point three and MdRAVL one were ligated into the PJG four dash five vector using restriction enzyme sites Eco R one and Xho one. MdERF three and MdERF one hundred eighteen were ligated into the Placzi vector, using restriction enzyme sites Eco R one and Xho one. All primers used are listed in Table S sixteen.


## EMSA

The proteins of MdDof five point three and MdRAVL one were induced at thirty-seven degrees Celsius for six hours. Proteins were purified as described by Li. Oligonucleotide probes were synthesized and labelled with biotin. The biotin end-labelled double-stranded D N A probes were prepared by annealing complementary oligonucleotides as follows: the oligonucleotides were heated at ninety-five degrees Celsius for five minutes, then seventy-two degrees Celsius for twenty minutes, and immediately left to cool to room temperature before use. The biotin-labelled MdERF three promoter and MdERF one hundred eighteen primer sequences are shown in Table S sixteen.


## Y two H assay

The CDS region of MdERF three was ligated into the pGADT seven vector using the Eco R one and Xho one restriction sites as described previously. The full-length MdERF one hundred eighteen, one through three hundred forty-four amino acids, was ligated into the pGBKT seven binding domain vector using the Eco R one and Sal one sites. The primers used are shown in Table S sixteen. B D and A D vectors were co-transformed into the Y two H Gold yeast strain. The interactions between two proteins were detected using the Matchmaker Gold Y two H library screening system.


## Bi F C assay

The full-length CDS of MdERF three or MdERF one hundred eighteen without stop codon was amplified and ligated into p S P Y N E dash thirty-five S and p S P Y C E dash thirty-five S vectors containing green fluorescent protein, using the one-step seamless cloning kit; the constructs were checked by sequencing and then transformed into A. tumefaciens strain G V three one zero one. Two plasmids were co-transformed into the abaxial side of four- to six-week-old N. benthamiana leaves to detect specific interactions as described previously. After forty-eight hours co-infiltration, the N. benthamiana leaves were observed using an L S M five ten dash Meta confocal laser microscope. G F P signals were imaged under four hundred eighty-eight nanometer excitation wavelength.


## Kompetitive allele-specific P C R, K A S P, genotyping and G A P modelling

Three hundred hybrids were randomly selected from each F one population of 'Zisai Pearl' x 'Red Fuji', 'Zisai Pearl' x 'Golden

Delicious', and 'Jonathan' x 'Golden Delicious'. All these hybrids were genotyped for the fifty-six markers, twenty-nine for flesh firmness retainability and twenty-seven for flesh crispness retainability, using KASP assay. The two hundred base pair sequences flanking the interested SNPs were used for K A S P primer design. The KASP primers are listed in Table S seven. The K A S P assay was performed using the L G C SNPline and the data were analysed using SNPviewer software. The D N A of parental cultivars, 'Jonathan', 'Golden Delicious', 'Zisai Pearl', and 'Red Fuji', were used as control in K A S P assay, because the marker genotypes of these cultivars were already known by previous parental re-sequencing.

Marker genotype effect was estimated by the deviation between the average O P V of the hybrids with the same genotype and overall mean phenotype value of the training populations. By using hybrids without missing marker genotype data, the G P V was calculated by sum up the genotype effects of all markers and population mean phenotype value. The prediction accuracy of G P V was evaluated by the Pearson's correlation coefficient between G P V and O P V of the hybrids. Fivefold cross-validation, run five times, was used to test the accuracy of the G A P models.


## Statistical analysis

Significant differences were analysed using the independent samples Student's T test. Asterisks denoted significance: P is less than zero point zero five, P is less than zero point zero one. Error bars indicate standard deviation of three biological replicates, each containing at least three technical replicates.


## Accession numbers

Sequence data were based on online databases. All B S A dash seq and R N A dash seq raw data have been deposited in the N C B I Sequence Read Archive under the accession number P R J N A six five zero five nine two. The accession numbers for the genes in this study are as follow: MdPME two MD zero two G one two zero seven nine zero zero, MdPGLR three MD zero three G one two six zero seven zero zero, MdACO four MD one six G one zero one nine nine zero zero, MdDOF five point three MD eleven G one one two three four zero zero, MdRAVL one MD one six G one zero four seven seven zero zero, MdERF three MD zero three G one one nine four three zero zero and MdERF one hundred eighteen MD one六 G one zero四 three五 zero zero.

This work was supported by the earmarked fund of the China Agriculture Research System, C A R S dash twenty-seven, and was partially funded by Qinhuangdao Beidaihe Zhongbaolvdu Agriculture Research Center. We also thank M O G O E D I T for language editing on this manuscript.


## Conflicts of interest

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.


## Author contributions

B.W. analysed all the data and wrote the draft manuscript. X.Z.Z. and Z.H.H. designed and supervised the experiments. X.Z.Z. revised the manuscript. F.S. gave advice for bioinformatic analysis. X.W., W.Y.Z., C.X., Y.D., T.W., Z.Y.H. and Q.Z. collected the apple samples. Y.W., T.W. and X.F.X. prepared the plant materials. All authors read and approved the manuscript.


## Supporting information

Additional supporting information may be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of the article.