## Frontiers in Energy Research Frontiers in Energy Research

Linking geological and infrastructural requirements for large-scale underground hydrogen storage in Germany

Hydrogen storage might be key to the success of the hydrogen economy, and hence the energy transition in Germany. One option for cost-effective storage of large quantities of hydrogen is the geological subsurface. However, previous experience with underground hydrogen storage is restricted to salt caverns, which are limited in size and space. In contrast, pore storage facilities in aquifers and/or depleted hydrocarbon reservoirs could play a vital role in meeting base load needs due to their wide availability and large storage capacity, but experiences are limited to past operations with hydrogen-bearing town gas. To overcome this barrier, here we investigate hydrogen storage in porous storage systems in a two-step process: One) First, we investigate positive and cautionary indicators for safe operations of hydrogen storage in pore storage systems. Two) Second, we estimate hydrogen storage capacities of pore storage systems in current and decommissioned underground natural gas storage systems and saline aquifers. Our systematic review highlights that optimal storage conditions in terms of energy content and hydrogen quality are found in sandstone reservoirs in absence of carbonate and iron bearing accessory minerals at a depth of approximately one thousand one hundred meters and a temperature of at least forty degrees Celsius. Porosity and permeability of the reservoir formation should be at least twenty percent and five times ten to the negative thirteen square meters, approximately five hundred millidarcys, respectively. In addition, the pH of the brine should fall below six and the salinity should exceed one hundred milligrams per liter. Based on these estimates, the total hydrogen storage capacity in underground natural gas storages is estimated to be up to eight billion cubic meters or zero point seventy-two million tonnes at standard temperature and pressure corresponding to twenty-nine terawatt hours of energy equivalent of hydrogen. Saline aquifers may offer additional storage capacities of eighty-one point six to six hundred ninety-one point eight million tonnes of hydrogen, which amounts to three point two to twenty-seven point three petawatt hours of energy equivalent of hydrogen, the majority of which is located in the North German basin. Pore storage systems could therefore become a crucial element of the future German hydrogen infrastructure, especially in regions with large industrial hydrogen storage demand and likely hydrogen imports via pipelines and ships.


## One Introduction

Global environmental changes and future energy needs are among the most fundamental challenges facing humanity in the near future. Green hydrogen produced by renewable energies has the capacity to overcome these obstacles by decarbonizing the industry, electricity generation, transport, and heat. With its National Hydrogen Strategy, the German government has given a strong boost to the hydrogen economy in all sectors of the energy system. But renewable energy sources needed for the production of green hydrogen are subjected to weather-related and seasonal fluctuations. Hence, measures are needed to stabilize and secure future energy supplies. Hydrogen storage could therefore be the decisive factor in the energy transition. Only then the divergent hydrogen demand and production will be balanced.

In addition to the storage of hydrogen in tanks or pipes, the geological subsurface also offers possibilities for the long-term storage of hydrogen. The hydrocarbon industry has been using the underground for decades in Germany and around the world to store large quantities of natural gas in the pore space of rocks or in salt caverns. More than twenty-three billion cubic meters of natural gas are stored underground in Germany. This gives Germany the fourth-largest storage capacity in the world after the United States, Russia, and Ukraine. About thirty-six percent, approximately eight point six billion cubic meters, of the current technically usable working gas volume is stored in pore storage systems for seasonal base load coverage and seventy-four percent of the installed capacity are stored in salt caverns for peak load coverage with more efficient injection and withdrawal cycles. Nevertheless, current research into underground hydrogen storage potential in Germany and Europe has mainly focused on salt caverns only. The total energy storage potential in salt caverns is estimated to be as high as eighty-four point eight petawatt hours in Europe and thirty-five point seven petawatt hours in Germany alone. It is therefore not surprising that first flagship projects for underground storage of hydrogen in salt caverns at the field scale have already been launched in Germany at the Bad Lauchstädt Energy Park, in Rüdersdorf, and in Epe. However, suitable salt deposits are locally limited and only nine percent of the total worldwide working gas capacity is attributed to salt caverns. Pore storage facilities such as depleted gas fields and saline aquifers could therefore play an important role in the energy transition due to their widespread and broad availability across Europe.

Here, we investigate safety requirements and storage potentials in the light of future hydrogen needs. The aim is to formulate recommendations for future underground hydrogen storage in porous media. Our study starts with an overview of the past, present, and future of underground hydrogen storage in Germany, discussing the experience with underground hydrogen storage and the prospects for hydrogen network structures. It highlights the progress that has been made and the challenges that need to be overcome for widespread deployment. In particular, there are critical factors that need to be considered in the design and operation of underground hydrogen storage facilities to ensure their safe and efficient operation. These critical factors or indicators, such as biotic and abiotic reactions, sealing capacity, cap rock integrity, cushion gas requirements, etc., are discussed before estimates of underground hydrogen storage capacity in Germany are made. Our estimates are made with respect to the discussion of technical hydrogen storage capacity in former and current underground gas storage facilities and the theoretical hydrogen storage capacity in saline aquifers. This section provides a quantitative assessment of the potential of underground hydrogen storage to support the energy transition in Germany. The fifth and final section discusses storage capacity and demand in Europe and assesses the costs and purity requirements of underground hydrogen storage. It builds on the findings of the previous sections and highlights the economic and technical challenges associated with underground hydrogen storage and the potential role of underground hydrogen storage in supporting the development of a sustainable hydrogen economy in Europe.


## Two Past, present, and future of underground hydrogen storage in Germany

Two point one Experiences with underground hydrogen storage

Before the introduction of natural gas, town gas with a hydrogen content of more than fifty percent hydrogen was produced, transported and stored in Germany and Europe. Town gas was derived from coal, and its production still persists in China and Asia. When storage tanks could no longer meet the requirements of the gas industry, underground gas storage facilities were built in the porous geological subsurface starting from the nineteen fifties. Pore storage systems were launched in Beynes, France; Lobodice, Czech Republic; Engelbostel, Hannover; Reitbrook, Hamburg; Hähnlein, Darmstadt; Kirchheiligen, Mühlhausen/Tühringen; Eschenfelden, Fürth/Oberpfalz; Ketzin, Brandenburg even before the first salt caverns were put into operation in Bad Lauchstädt and Kiel in the nineteen seventies. Today, these underground storage facilities have been converted to natural gas storage facilities or have since been abandoned. Currently, pure hydrogen, greater than ninety-five percent hydrogen, is solely stored in salt caverns at a few sites, namely, Teesside, United Kingdom and Clemens Dome, United States; Spindletop, United States; and Moss Bloss, United States. Given this sparse and limited experience with hydrogen in pore storage systems, it is necessary to formulate recommendations for the safe handling of hydrogen in the subsurface.


## Two point two. Prospects for hydrogen network structures

The design of future hydrogen infrastructure and storage requirements in Germany remains uncertain and complex. It is challenging to analyze underground storage requirements and infrastructures in such a highly complex and swiftly evolving environment. While the German National Hydrogen Strategy was published in twenty twenty to promote the use of hydrogen in all sectors of the hydrogen economy, it didn't specify the design of the hydrogen transport and storage infrastructure. To examine the potential use of underground hydrogen storage in porous media, three interdependent variables that could impact future storage requirements in Germany have to be considered: one, spatial distribution of hydrogen production via electrolysis; two, hydrogen demand centres; and three, hydrogen pipelines and import terminals.

Lux et al. investigated the positioning of electrolysers, underground storage and transport infrastructure in a greenhouse gas-neutral German energy system using five scenarios. Regardless of the scenario, their calculations indicate that seventy-one percent of the total hydrogen production in Germany will be located in the North and Baltic Seas, with a combined hydrogen production of eighty-three to one hundred twenty-nine terawatt-hours by two thousand fifty and total electrolyzer capacities of thirty-seven to fifty-five gigawatt-electrical. The concentration in these regions is due to the high potential for wind power, and it does not conflict with the alternative of expanding the electricity grid. Sens et al. report similar findings, as they calculate the second-lowest hydrogen supply cost at the North Sea, while Husarek et al. also support the idea of regional concentration, which contrasts with the results of Gils et al. Lux et al. demonstrate that hydrogen can serve as a seasonal and long-term storage medium, with a working gas volume of forty-two to one hundred four terawatt-hours of hydrogen in two thousand fifty. In contrast, Gils et al. report a required storage capacity of fifty-three terawatt-hours in the same year. In the modelled energy systems, hydrogen storage levels decrease during winter when renewable electricity generation is lower and increase in summer with higher renewable electricity feed-in. This seasonal profile for hydrogen storage has been identified in previous studies by Gils et al. and Welder et al. for Germany, and Cárdenas et al., Samsatli and Samsatli, Gabrielli et al., and Hernandez and Gençer for different regions or countries. Large-scale storage directly on site or at the end of a transport pipeline at the demand location can reduce hydrogen costs by decreasing excess electricity.

In order to establish a cost-effective hydrogen economy and a greenhouse-gas neutral energy system in the long run, a Germany-wide transport network is necessary. However, the design of such a network and the routing of its pipelines is still up for debate. Although detailed expansion plans differ, there is consensus in the literature on the need to connect production hubs and import terminals in the North with demand centers in the South of Germany. The European gas network operators have proposed a European-wide hydrogen pipeline vision (hydrogen backbone), which focuses on the repurposing of existing natural gas infrastructures. For example, in Germany, a North-South pipeline from Rostock to Lake Constance is planned to be established from two thousand thirty-five onwards, repurposing the existing natural gas infrastructure, which is considered more cost effective than building new pipelines. The repurposing of pipelines and port infrastructure is also a part of the IPCEI Hydrogen initiative (important projects of common European interests). The association of the supra-regional gas transmission companies in Germany (FNB Gas) develops a joint network development plan every two years, which is then submitted to the German Federal Network Agency. The twenty twenty-two plan models a national hydrogen network in Germany, based on a survey of transportation needs. However, due to the current regulatory framework, this network is not legally binding. The twenty twenty plan only contained a rough outline of a visionary hydrogen network, in contrast to the more detailed model presented in the twenty twenty-two plan.

Assessing hydrogen storage requirements is a multi-faceted endeavour that includes an evaluation of potential future hydrogen demand and its regional distribution. Future hydrogen demand is still uncertain, while Lux et al. indicate a range of hydrogen demand scenarios between thirty-four and six hundred sixty-seven terawatt-hours, final energy demand in two thousand fifty, attributable to different usage categories such as industry, transport, and heating. To derive a more comprehensive estimate, Neuwirth et al. conducted a site- and process-specific bottom-up analysis of hydrogen demand from the energy-intensive sectors alone, revealing a potential hydrogen demand of three hundred twenty-six terawatt-hours per annum. The spatial distribution of this demand is heterogeneous, with concentration in a few regions. Consequently, we posit that underground hydrogen storage is more likely in these regions, given that they are probable endpoints for pipelines, and industry clusters require an economic and steady hydrogen supply, which can be secured through storage.


## Three. Indicators for safe operations of hydrogen in pore storage systems

There are recommendations and evaluation schemes for the geotechnical and energetic use of the subsurface on a German and European level based on the operation of hydrocarbon reservoirs, underground storage facilities for both natural gas and carbon dioxide, the search for radioactive repositories and the utilization of geothermal resources. Here we report positive and cautionary indicators for safe operations with hydrogen in underground pore storage systems based on a literature survey. The results are summarized in Table one.


## Three point one Biotic and abiotic reactions

Depleted fields and aquifers are composed of either sandstones or limestones. Sandstones consist primarily of stable, non-reactive silicate minerals, namely, quartz and feldspar that will not react with hydrogen at reservoir conditions. Major components in limestone reservoirs and mineral accessories in sandstones or in the caprock, however, may form reactions with hydrogen forming toxic gases such as hydrogen sulphide. Possible reactants include carbonate [CaCO3, MgCO3,

(Ca, Mg) CO3], sulfate (CuSO4, CuSO4H2O), sulphide (S, FeS, FeS2, PbS, HgS, ZnS, Cu2S, CuFeS2, CS2), and oxide (Fe2O3, Fe3O4, FeO, MgO) minerals and reservoir gases such as CO, CO2, and hydrocarbons. However most of these reactions are insignificant at reservoir conditions, because hydrogen redox reactivity is kinetically limited due to its high bonding energy and thus most of the possible redox reactions remain insignificant at low temperature. However, experimental data demonstrates that hydrogen induced reduction of pyrite into pyrrhotite is likely to produce sulphide at reservoir conditions and that the pH of the media is a critical parameter controlling the extent of the reaction at low temperature. This is consistent with field observations in the town gas storage field in Beynes, France, where pyrite reduction is believed to be responsible for the observed rise in hydrogen sulphide within the reservoir. Although this represents a potential risk to underground hydrogen storage, the study also shows that pyrite reduction could be prevented at acidic reservoir conditions.

In contrast to abiotic reactions, the extent and impact of which is discussed in the literature, it is widely agreed that biotic processes may endanger hydrogen quality and/or lead to hydrogen consumption. Several classes of microorganisms present at reservoir conditions are known for consuming hydrogen, which are methanogens, hydrogenotrophic sulfate reducers, homoacetogens and hydrogenotrophic iron three-reducing bacteria. Possible implications might include the production of methane, acetic acid, and hydrogen sulphide in addition to hydrogen loss. A well-known example for such biotic hydrogen loss is the Czech underground storage facility Lobodice in which methanogens were shown to transform hydrogen and carbon dioxide to methane, resulting in significant hydrogen reduction from fifty-four volume percent input to thirty-seven volume percent output over a time period of seven months. Optimum conditions where growth peaks and critical conditions beyond which no growth is possible were summarized for several classes of microorganisms showing that most bacteria favour moderate temperatures between twenty and forty degrees Celsius, salinity less than one hundred grams per liter and pH levels between six and seven point five.


## Three point two Petrophysical properties of prospective pore storage systems

The petrophysical properties of prospective pore storage systems are important factors to consider when selecting a site for underground gas storage. It is noteworthy that the optimal porosity and intrinsic permeability values for rock formations utilized in gas storage may vary depending on the specific storage application and the type of gas being stored. For instance, high-pressure storage applications may necessitate higher permeability than low-pressure storage. Other factors such as effective stress state, temperature, and deformation state must also be considered when evaluating the suitability of a rock formation for underground storage.

Technically in underground hydrogen storage operations, a rock with high porosity and permeability is more desirable for hydrogen storage because it allows for higher storage volumes as well as higher injection and withdrawal rates representing the unloading and loading cycles, respectively. Higher energy efficiencies tend to be expected for high intrinsic permeability rock types when hydrogen is injected into them. Furthermore, the hydraulic properties of the reservoir rock are a key factor influencing the interaction between fluid pressure and mechanical properties of the reservoir, known as hydro-mechanical coupling. The permeability controls the fluid flow and thus the temporal and spatial distribution of fluid pressure, which in turn affects the effective stress state of the reservoir and its mechanical properties. This interaction must be considered and studied in the design and operation of underground hydrogen storage systems, as it can change the security and efficiency of the storage process to a significant degree. Zones of high permeability can reduce the risk of high fluid-pressure transients in the reservoir and around the wells, and thus the risk of inelastic rock deformation. Local high-pressure zones can form within low-permeability rocks, leading to aftershocks and induced seismicity in worst-case scenarios. In addition, low-pressure zones in the reservoir and around the wells can lead to a decrease in the production rate.

Although hydrogen storage has been extensively researched, to the authors' knowledge, there is currently no recommendation as to which rock type, porosity, and permeability is best suited for UHS. Therefore, requirements for the effective porosity (i.e., connected porosity), intrinsic permeability and reservoir thickness for UHS operations are derived from the experience of the hydrocarbon and geothermal industry as well as conceptual studies on potential international hydrogen storage in depleted reservoir settings: Chadwick et al. summarized that porosities and permeabilities of at least zero point two zero and five hundred millidarcies (approx. five times ten to the negative thirteenth square meters) are considered ideal geologic storage conditions. Porosities of less than zero point one and permeabilities of less than two hundred millidarcies (approx. two times ten to the negative thirteenth square meters) are considered cautionary indicators by these authors. Sedlacek propounds that from a geological and reservoir perspective porosities and permeabilities within the range of eighteen to fifteen percent and greater than one hundred millidarcies are suitable for gas reservoirs, respectively. All these indicative limits are consistent with the study by Pfeiffer and Bauer for subsurface porous media hydrogen storage, which used on-site and off-site porosities and permeabilities of the Middle Rhaetian (main sandstone) of Northern Germany of zero point three three and five hundred seventy-two millidarcies, respectively. Similar porosities (zero point one to zero point three) and permeabilities in the range of twenty to two thousand five hundred millidarcies are also used by other studies on UHS. On the basis of these literature values, we suggest permeabilities and porosities greater than five hundred millidarcies and zero point two, respectively, for optimal and safe operation of UHS systems. However, the range of porosity and permeability depends on the specific properties of the rock formation, so a thorough petrophysical characterization of the rock is required in advance to determine its suitability for hydrogen storage. In addition to the consideration of intrinsic permeability, the characterization of relative permeability in wet porous rocks is crucial for optimizing storage capacity and recovery efficiency. The determination of the relative permeability of hydrogen-brine rock systems is very complex as it depends on the number of hydrogen injection and reproduction cycles as well as the capillary forces responsible for residual hydrogen trapping. Accordingly, these parameters should be determined based on experimental measurements to determine the intrinsic permeability.


## Three point three. Storage depth, sealing capacity, and integrity of caprock

The seal capacity of a reservoir refers to the ability of the rock layers above the reservoir (seals) to prevent the upward migration of fluids or gases out of the reservoir. The seal capacity is therefore critical for the effective trapping and storage of hydrogen in a reservoir, allowing for the efficient extraction and utilization of the resource. The dominant trapping mechanism is the capillary properties of the cap rock that will trap a hydrogen column until the net buoyancy (i.e., difference between hydrogen and brine) exceeds the capillary displacement pressure of the seal. The properties that define the capillary entry pressure are the size of the largest interconnected pore throat of the cap rock, the hydrogen-brine interfacial tension and wetting behavior of the cap rock with respect to hydrogen and brine, expressed by the brine-rock-hydrogen contact angle theta (see detailed review by Aslannezhad et al.). The height of the trapped hydrogen column can thus be expressed by balancing the buoyancy and capillary entry pressure:

H equals two times I F T times cosine theta divided by R times G times delta rho. One.

The hydrogen-water and hydrogen-brine interfacial tension was measured experimentally by Chow et al. and Hosseini et al. and was shown to decline with depth, but increase with salinity. However, under storage conditions, one thousand meters and fifty degrees Celsius, the I F T remains relatively high (approximately seventy millinewtons per square meter) and hydrogen and brine remain immiscible. Hydrogen wettability of selected minerals were also measured and calculated in a few studies. Hydrogen wettability of quartz (pure and aged with stearic acid) were reported to increase with organic acid surface concentration, pressure and temperature (Iglauer et al.,

Besides the withdrawal, working volume (W V) and higher heating value (H H V) of methane (C H four) and hydrogen (H two) are given for the respective fields. The data have been taken from Sedlacek, EEK Redaktion. The literature used always contains the data status of the previous year.

Twenty twenty-one. While pure quartz remained always strongly water-wet (brine contact angles less than fifty degrees) for all conditions tested, aged quartz samples were weakly water-wet (brine contact angles fifty to seventy degrees) for most scenarios examined. Al-Yaseri and team reported contact angles for the clay brine and shale brine system based on empirical correlations as a function of pressure and temperature. All clays showed water wetting (zero to less than forty degrees) under all experimental conditions and were shown to be conducive to capillary and residual trapping of the gas. The shale's hydrogen sealing capacity was shown to decrease with increasing depth and TOC values, but remained at strongly water-wet conditions with contact angles of not more than seventeen degrees at highest pressure and TOC. The above measured and estimated data show that rocks are highly water-wet (contact angle less than fifty) in the presence of hydrogen at most storage conditions. However, based on the hydrogen wetting behavior of aged quartz and aged mica, researchers demonstrated that angles may increase to ninety degrees or more at greater depth (three thousand seven hundred meters for quartz), which sets a limit to hydrogen storage capacity below which hydrogen will percolate through the cap rock. In practice however, limitations on the depth are questions of economics and depths greater than one thousand two hundred meters are uncommon in underground gas storage facilities. The optimum storage depth for hydrogen can be computed based on the sealing capacity of the cap rock and the density of hydrogen gas that was estimated to be at one thousand one hundred meters depth assuming average geothermal and hydrostatic gradients. In line with carbon dioxide storage, a minimum depth of eight hundred meters is recommended in order to avoid spoiling potable water resources.


## Three point four. Cushion gas requirements

The capacity of any gas reservoir consists of two components: cushion gas (also known as base gas), which is used to maintain the minimum reservoir pressure and hence desired production levels, and working gas, which refers to the portion of gas that can be withdrawn and used during a storage cycle. In underground gas storage, the composition of the working and cushion gas is generally the same. The total amount of cushion gas required depends mainly on the type of storage, with pore storages requiring higher cushion gas shares than salt caverns. However, no general recommendations can be made because the proportion of cushion gas in pore storage facilities depends on many reservoir parameters, such as storage volume, permeability and porosity, reservoir geometry, depth and the resulting pressure and temperature conditions. It also depends on technical configurations, such as well distributions, shut-in periods between injection and production, and the respective injection and production rates. In Germany, for example, the cushion gas share in natural gas pore storage facilities active and inactive ranges from twenty-one to ninety-three percent.

Unfortunately, there are no direct experiences with pure hydrogen in pore storages we can draw on, but numerical reservoir simulations demonstrate that aquifers and depleted hydrocarbon fields can be operated with reasonable hydrogen recovery rates of seventy-eight to ninety-three percent. Simulations of saline aquifers show that the injected cushion gas can efficiently displace formation water from injection and production wells, creating the conditions for subsequent hydrogen injection and withdrawal with significant improvements in UHS performance. This also results in a lower demand for cushion gas in deeper structures and reservoirs with higher permeabilities. Since hydrogen in particular involves considerable upfront costs, alternative cushion gas compositions such as nitrogen, carbon dioxide or natural gas have been discussed in the literature to cut costs and reduce carbon dioxide emissions. Hence, the possibility of mixing with an inert cushion gas that is present in the reservoir must be considered. Gas mixing depends on viscosity and density contrasts, and is governed by diffusion and dispersion. A process that is particularly important to consider when converting depleted hydrocarbon fields with high gas saturation and low reservoir pressures. However numerical simulations of depleted gas reservoirs indicate that undesired physical phenomena such as viscous fingering caused by mobility and density contrasts are of minor importance in gas saturated reservoirs. Numerical simulations in saline reservoirs with hydrogen and nitrogen as working and cushion gas, respectively, demonstrate likewise the overall feasibility, but stress the importance of optimized injections schemes as the volume-weighted average hydrogen fraction of the produced gas increased from fifty-two percent during the first cycle to eighty-five percent in the fourth cycle. In a most recent study of aquifer storage and withdrawal capacity, researchers demonstrated likewise the operational feasibility and indicated that methane outperforms carbon dioxide and nitrogen in terms of hydrogen recovery. The general feasibility has also been demonstrated in converted town gas storages across Europe. At Beynes, for example, natural gas was being injected on one side of the reservoir from nineteen seventy-two while town gas had been withdrawn from the other side of the reservoir, replacing all of the working and forty percent of the cushion gas with natural gas. Despite the fact that sixty percent of town gas resided in the reservoir, only minimal mixing of gases occurred during conversion, and less than one percent of the withdrawn gas consisted of the original town gas after conversion was completed in nineteen seventy-three. It follows that detailed reservoir models are required to draw accurate conclusions about the demand and cushion gas requirements for any pore storage system, despite its general feasibility.


## Three point five. Hydrogen solubility and losses

The solubility of hydrogen in brine water depends on a number of factors, including temperature, pressure, and salinity, but it is generally lower compared to other gases such as carbon dioxide or methane. Hence, less loss due to dissolution is expected compared to other gases. Experimental and modeled data suggest that hydrogen solubility increases with increasing pressure, but decreases with increasing salinity resulting in less than zero point zero zero one of mole fraction of hydrogen at storage conditions. This is important, because dissolved hydrogen may diffuse and leak out of the reservoir resulting in hydrogen loss. The rate of diffusion will likewise depend on a number of factors, including the temperature and pressure. Diffusion rates of hydrogen in brine water can be estimated using theoretical and empirical relationships but have also been examined experimentally, showing that at storage conditions, the rate of hydrogen diffusion is approximately twice as high when compared to methane and three times as high when compared to carbon dioxide.


## Three point six. Thermophysical parameters of hydrogen at underground storage conditions

Comprehension of the thermophysical properties of hydrogen is essential for a detailed consideration of its storage potential in UHS systems. In particular, with regard to the storage of hydrogen in aquifers and depleted hydrocarbon reservoirs, a detailed consideration of its two thermophysical properties, density and viscosity, is essential under pressure and temperature conditions prevailing in the storage system. For this application, it is also useful to compare these properties of hydrogen with those of methane and carbon dioxide. All thermophysical properties of hydrogen, methane, and carbon dioxide presented here were obtained from the NIST chemistry web book database and are intended to serve as a reference for upcoming UHS systems.

One of the most notable thermophysical characteristics of hydrogen is its low density, which dictates that it must be compressed or liquefied for any practical application. At standard temperature (zero degrees Celsius or two hundred seventy-three point one five Kelvin) and pressure (zero point one MPa or one bar), the density of hydrogen is zero point zero eight eight seven one kilograms per meter cubed according to the equation of state for normal hydrogen. Due to the low critical temperature (negative two hundred forty point zero zero five degrees Celsius or thirty-three point one four five Kelvin) and low critical pressure

(one point two nine six four MPa or twelve point nine six four bar) of hydrogen, it would be stored in the gaseous phase in porous storage systems. Hydrogen is a highly compressible gas, and its density increases significantly with increasing pressure and barely with increasing temperature. Consequently, hydrogen storage efficiency increases with increasing reservoir depth. But, because methane and carbon dioxide are much denser than hydrogen, storing hydrogen gas of the same mass requires higher pressure and less hydrogen can be stored in the same reservoir volume compared to methane and carbon dioxide. This underlines the importance of storage capacity in hydrogen storage. In this context, depleted hydrocarbon storage facilities represent a more interesting storage option compared to salt caverns and aquifers due to their large storage space and high availability. Moreover, the large density difference between hydrogen and dense formation water and cushion gas can cause a strong gravity segregation effect, resulting in the accumulation of a hydrogen cap beneath the cap rock, which could ensure that hydrogen will remain in the reservoir. Conversely, some researchers emphasized that a hydrogen plume is susceptible to formidable buoyancy forces, with the magnitude of said forces directly correlating to the potential for hydrogen leakage. Literature suggests that water may ascend towards the production well under these conditions, making seasonal storage of hydrogen in porous storage systems challenging.

While the hydrogen density and thus the compressibility in the depth range of underground hydrogen storage systems mainly increases with increasing pressure, the dynamic viscosity increases significantly with increasing temperature. In the range of standard conditions up to pressures of fifty megapascals and temperatures of fifty degrees Celsius, the viscosity shows a comparable temperature and pressure dependence. For example, hydrogen viscosity increases by about fifteen percent from standard temperature and pressure conditions to an elevated temperature of fifty degrees Celsius. At standard temperature, viscosity increases by about eighteen percent in the pressure range from zero point one to fifty megapascals. In direct comparison, the viscosities of methane and carbon dioxide are larger than those of hydrogen, and both show a dominant pressure dependence that far exceeds the behavior of hydrogen viscosity. Hence, hydrogen has a much higher mobility than methane and carbon dioxide. The viscosities of hydrogen and methane are still most similar here in comparison and are in the same order of magnitude. Underground hydrogen storages could thus be used as a direct substitute for methane storage. Due to their viscosities, hydrogen and methane can be stored in a wide range of underground reservoirs because they are not limited by reservoir conditions or depth. Rather, reservoirs are determined based on the geologic characteristics of the reservoirs, as appropriate containment features are required to seal against these mobile gases. But numerous subsequent studies have shown that the low density, viscosity, and molecular size of hydrogen result in more viscous fingering and poorer conformation during injection, faster migration toward structurally high sites, and some amount of unrecoverable hydrogen. For this reason, for example, recommend adjusting the flow rate of hydrogen and the size of the wellbore compared to operation with natural gas to minimize diffusion in porous media.

As previously described by us and other studies, the optimal depth, D, for underground hydrogen storage systems is in the range of eight hundred to one thousand one hundred meters depth. Assuming a mean surface temperature of eight point two degrees Celsius and an average geothermal gradient of thirty-two degrees Celsius per kilometer, a temperature range of thirty-three point eight to forty-three point four degrees Celsius results for the target depth. For an average density, Plith, of the overlying rock of two thousand three hundred to two thousand six hundred kilograms per cubic meter and a lithostatic factor, Flith, of zero point five to zero point seven, the pressure at which hydrogen could be stored in underground hydrogen storage systems can be determined using the following simple relationship:

P Hydrogen equals Flith multiplied by D multiplied by nine point eight one meters per second squared multiplied by Plith equals nine point zero three to nineteen point six four megapascals.

This temperature and pressure range corresponds to the optimal conditions for the geological storage of hydrogen in porous storage systems. The so-called lithostatic factor was introduced here to represent the ratio of working pressure to lithostatic pressure in the reservoir. For this typical geological conditions for porous media storage, hydrogen has a low density and viscosity in the narrow ranges of six point six to thirteen point five kilograms per cubic meter and nine point two to nine point six micropascal-seconds, respectively. The influence of temperature and pressure variations on the density and viscosity of highly compressible hydrogen is thus almost negligible at this reservoir depth. In contrast, the thermophysical properties of carbon dioxide and methane behave in a much more pressure- and temperature-dependent manner, which is reflected in the relative density and viscosity ratios. Within the proposed reservoir range, the density and viscosity ratios of hydrogen and methane do not vary too much, whereas the corresponding ratios of hydrogen to carbon dioxide can vary by up to a factor of about two to three. This has to be considered when re-using former natural gas reservoirs with hydrogen.


## Four. Capacity estimates for underground hydrogen storage in Germany

Four point one. Technical hydrogen storage capacity in former and current underground gas storage systems

Underground gas storage facilities can be adapted for hydrogen storage and some of the currently operating underground storage facilities have already stored town gas with a hydrogen content of about fifty to sixty percent in the past. Thus, in a first step, we focus on the installed capacity of underground pore storages in Germany. The hydrogen storage capacity is calculated based on the recoverable volume of natural gas as reported by the State Authority for Mining,

Energy, and Geology in Germany. These data are based on empirical values, which are derived from technical and economic considerations for natural gas and, thus, provide sound estimates of the dynamic recovery of hydrogen. The amount of energy stored as hydrogen in the working gas, which describes the portion of gas that is cycled in and out of the reservoir, E Hydrogen, is calculated according to the modified equation after Mouli-Castillo et al., that writes

E Hydrogen equals higher heating value of hydrogen multiplied by working volume of methane multiplied by partial pressure of methane at standard temperature and pressure divided by partial pressure of hydrogen in aires and partial pressure of hydrogen at standard temperature and pressure.

where HHV H2 greater than WV CH4, PH at STP, and PCHA at STP denote the higher heating value of hydrogen (three point five four kilowatt-hours per cubic meter), the working gas volume of natural gas in the storage system at standard temperature and pressure, and the density of hydrogen and methane at standard temperature and pressure, respectively. PH2 at res and PCHA at res refer to the hydrogen and methane density at pressure and temperature when the reservoir is full (P max). However, estimates on the operating gas pressure P min / max are not publicly available and we, therefore, estimate the maximum gas operation pressure to be seventy percent of the overburden pressure. In equation three, the product of the density ratio is utilized for the conversion of reported methane working gas volumes at standard temperature and pressure to hydrogen gas volumes at standard temperature and pressure. However, our data suggest that a constant conversion parameter of zero point eight five can be used over a range of temperatures and pressures relevant to underground gas storage, as shown in Table two. The results are summarized in Table two and Figure three. At present, there are sixteen underground pore storage facilities installed in Germany that have total installed capacity of around eight billion cubic meters of natural gas with a thermal energy content of ninety-five point two four four terawatt-hours, estimated using a higher heating value of eleven point zero seven kilowatt-hours per cubic meter for methane. This represents about one-third of the total underground storage capacity of natural gas in Germany. The remaining natural gas is stored in two hundred seventy-two salt caverns. In contrast, the corresponding hydrogen storage capacity is lower, amounting to around seven billion cubic meters of hydrogen gas with a thermal energy content of twenty-five terawatt-hours, given its lower energy content per volume (three point five four kilowatt-hours per cubic meter). The distribution of these pore storages is shown in Figure three. Hence, more volume is needed to store the same amount of energy compared to natural gas and other common fuels. Furthermore, decommissioned pore storage facilities could potentially provide an additional storage potential of one billion cubic meter of hydrogen or four terawatt-hours of hydrogen energy equivalent. Hence a total of eight billion cubic meters of hydrogen, which amounts to twenty-nine terawatt-hours of hydrogen energy equivalent could be stored in current and former underground gas storage pore storage systems. Figure three shows the distribution of all pore storage (active and inactive) and compares it to the planned network expansion initiative.


## Four point two Theoretical hydrogen storage capacity in saline aquifers

Additional underground storage capacities may become available in saline aquifers that hold the highest storage potential due to their widespread occurrence. In order to assess the hydrogen storage capacity in saline aquifers, we employ the volumetric assessment of CO2 storage capacities in saline aquifers, as previously conducted by Knopf and May. This probabilistic approach yields a proven, median, and possible CO2 storage capacity of twenty point four gigatonnes (P ten), forty-nine point one gigatonnes (P fifty), and one hundred fifteen point three gigatonnes (P ninety) for all evaluated rock units (onshore and offshore; green shaded areas in Figure three), respectively. Most of these resources are located in the North German Basin with estimated CO2 storage capacities ranging from nineteen point three gigatonnes (P ten) to one hundred eight point six gigatonnes (P ninety). By applying this data, we can estimate the thermal hydrogen energy content using

E H2 equals M CO2 times HHV H2 times RG times P CO2 divided by P H2

equation four where E H2 is the energy content of hydrogen (in petawatt-hours), M CO2 is the mass of stored CO2 (in gigatonnes), HHV H2 is the higher heating value of hydrogen (thirty-nine point four kilowatt-hours per kilogram), RG is the recoverable working gas volume (i.e., portion of the working gas volume: zero point four to zero point six), and the ratio P H2 is used to convert the mass of stored CO2 to the mass P CO2 of stored hydrogen. Knopf and May set an upper vertical limit of eight hundred meters in their analysis, at which

CO2 is typically subjected to temperatures and pressures that preserve CO2 in a supercritical state. At these conditions the resulting CO2 densities are two orders of magnitude greater compared to gaseous H2. The CO2 storage capacity can therefore be converted to the mass of stored hydrogen, M H2 (in gigatonnes), based on a conversion factor of zero point zero one (i.e., P CO2 P H2 equals zero point zero one). Hence, saline aquifers may yield an additional capacity of eighty-one point six megatonnes to six hundred ninety-one point eight megatonnes working gas volume of hydrogen resulting in three point two to twenty-seven point three petawatt-hours of hydrogen energy equivalent, but almost all of these storage capacities are restricted to the North German Basin, which may hold three point zero to twenty-five point seven petawatt-hours of hydrogen energy equivalent. Nevertheless, one should keep in mind that these estimates represent theoretical capacities, and the extent to which these reserves can actually be used should be verified based on the storage criteria proposed here, but will also depend on technical, economic, environmental, and social aspects and requires further analysis.


## Five Discussion

Five point one Storage capacities and requirements in Europe

Existing and decommissioned underground pore storage facilities may account for up to thirty terawatt-hours of energy equivalent of hydrogen, but are unlikely to meet future storage requirements of thirty-four to six hundred sixty-seven terawatt-hours, not least because an overall conversion of all storage facilities from natural gas to hydrogen is unlikely. To meet these future storage requirements, additional capacities may be needed in the form of depleted hydrocarbon fields and saline aquifers. Approximately three point two to twenty-seven point three petawatt-hours of hydrogen energy equivalent could be stored in saline aquifers in Germany, which is comparable to the technical storage potential in salt caverns that has been estimated at thirty-five point seven petawatt-hours and similar to the hydrogen storage potential in saline aquifers in the UK with an estimated capacity of two point one petawatt-hours of energy equivalent of hydrogen. In practice, many of the storage sites may, however, prove unsuitable, given the technical, economic and social constraints or not least because of the increasing competition between different geotechnical applications, be it geothermal energy or storage of natural gas, CO2, or hydrogen.

Other additional storage options that have been discussed in the literature include depleted gas and oil fields, which are considered appropriate for hydrogen underground storage because of their proven containment of natural gas, well explored subsurface, and developed capacity and infrastructure. Capacity estimates in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands show large potentials. Scafidi et al. identified ninety-five suitable depleted gas fields on the UK continental shelf with a total working gas capacity of six point nine petawatt hours energy equivalent of hydrogen. This estimate is slightly higher than the total hydrocarbon storage capacity in gas fields reported by Mouli-Castillo et al., which is based on the initial gas-in-place capacity of the respective hydrocarbon fields resulting in two point seven petawatt hours energy equivalent of hydrogen. Large storage potentials in depleted gas fields were also predicted for the Netherlands, one of the largest producers of natural gas in Europe. Estimates based on the original-gas-in-place analysis show that onshore capacities of two hundred seventy-seven terawatt hours and offshore capacities of one hundred seventy-nine terawatt hours could add up to a total of four hundred fifty-six terawatt hours energy equivalent of hydrogen in the Netherlands, which is an order of magnitude higher than the estimated hydrogen storage potential in salt caverns of forty-three terawatt hours. In Germany, too, depleted gas and oil fields could offer large storage capacities, but estimates on the original gas in place capacity are not publicly available, only cumulative production numbers. Cumulative gas production from all fields at standard temperature and pressure is one point zero five eight five one two times ten to the power of twelve cubic meters current as of one January two thousand twenty-one. Of this, one hundred fourteen point seven one nine times ten to the power of nine cubic meters of natural gas was produced from gas fields that are depleted today, most of it in Lower Saxony.

However, more important than uncertain volume estimates, is the question what proportion of this total can be utilized for underground hydrogen storage under the parameters presented here. For example, as fields in the Weser-Ems and Elbe-Weser sector located in the Rotliegend formation may reach depths of two thousand five hundred to five thousand meters. From an economic point of view,


## Frontiers in Energy Research

storing gas at these depths is not profitable due to the high compression costs. Typical depths of natural gas storage facilities are one thousand to one thousand two hundred meters. Physical constraints limit the storage of hydrogen to depth of three thousand seven hundred meters below which hydrogen is thought to percolate through the cap rock and, hence, confinement loss. Details on the specific gas production, horizon and depth are, however, not listed. Former gas deposits in carbonates of the Stassfurt formation, common in the eastern part of the North German Basin and the Thuringian Basin, may prove unsuitable as they contain significant amounts of hydrogen sulphur. However, former gas deposits in the Tertiary sandstones in the Upper Rhine Graben could again show suitable potential and supplement storage capacities in saline aquifers and the UGS facilities Stockstadt, Hähnlein, and Frankenthal. According to forecasts, this could be the end point of the North-South hydrogen pipeline. However, the nearby industrial clusters would depend on an economical and steady supply of hydrogen, which could be ensured by underground hydrogen storage facilities. For the Munich area, on the other hand, there are no pipeline plans according to the Gas Network Development Plan twenty twenty-two-twenty thirty-two or the IPCEI project plan. The question, therefore, arises as to how the supply will be ensured, and here, too, underground hydrogen storage could be of significance. Future research should therefore focus on the technical storage potential matching it with planned hydrogen infrastructures and industrial demands. This is of paramount importance in the South of Germany where storage potential is lower than in the North, making targeted planning necessary.


## Five point two. Assessment of underground hydrogen storage costs

Early economic analyses have shown that the cost of service for hydrogen is approximately equal to the costs of storing natural gas, but have stressed that the costs are very site specific and that a range of costs is possible for each type of underground storage. In a more recent life cycle cost analysis, Lord et al. conclude on a cost per kilogram of hydrogen basis that depleted hydrocarbon reservoirs and aquifers would be the economically attractive options, considering costs for pipelines and wells, compressors, cavern mining, and base gas. The overall costs for UHS amount to one point six dollars per kilogram for salt caverns, zero point zero four dollars per kilogram for depleted hydrocarbon fields, zero point zero eight dollars per kilogram for aquifers, and two point seventy-five dollars per kilogram for hard rock caverns. This methodology has been adapted with most recent cost estimates as of two thousand nineteen in a review by Raza et al. for UHS to be zero point fourteen to fourteen point zero three dollars per kilogram for salt caverns, one point forty-two dollars per kilogram for depleted hydrocarbon fields, one point forty-nine dollars per kilogram for aquifers, and zero point thirty-six to three point twenty dollars per kilogram for hard rock caverns. However, a comparison of natural gas storage costs in Europe and the United States shows that storage costs in Europe could be twice as high, not least because of higher regulatory requirements. But unlike in the United States, where these figures are sometimes published, cost estimates in Europe are rather poor. Something that all cost estimates for hydrogen pore storages have in common is the substantial influence of cushion gas on the ultimate costs of service, similar to natural gas storage facilities. At the same time it is considered more economic to leave some gas in the reservoir than to invest in the additional pumps and compressors to empty it completely. Therefore, one way to reduce these costs is to use lower cost cushion gas, but further research is needed to investigate the possibility of mixing, viscous fingering and gravity override that needs to be considered. The economics will therefore depend on the quantity of the cushion gas, the quality of the recovered hydrogen gas, and costs of gas separation if required.


## Five point three. Hydrogen purity requirements

Probably the most important parameters influencing the economic development of underground hydrogen storage are biotic and abiotic reactions. Potential contaminations may result from biotic reactions, such as for instance in the town gas storage Lobodice in which methanogens were shown to transform hydrogen and carbon dioxide to methane. Or abiotic reactions like in the town gas storage Beynes where pyrite reduction is believed to be responsible for the observed rise in hydrogen sulphide within the reservoir. There are several process engineering options for removing hydrogen sulphide from natural gas and the hydrocarbon industry has decades of experience. In Germany, too, a large proportion of all natural gas reserves contain varying amounts of hydrogen sulphur, which have been processed at the Großenkneten desulfurization plant since the nineteen seventies. Here the hydrogen sulphur is removed from the gas and converted to elemental Sulphur used as feedstock by the chemical industry. However, this is a costly process and the purity requirements of hydrogen extracted from the storage facility will ultimately depend on the end user. Fuel cells, for example, require hydrogen of ninety-nine point ninety-seven percent purity because contaminants such as carbon monoxide and hydrogen sulfide can impede electrode charging, while ammonia causes irreversible effects on fuel cell performance. In contrast, fuel quality specification for applications other than proton exchange membrane fuel cell, that is, combustion processes in hydrogen boilers will tolerate higher concentrations of impurities of about ninety-eight percent. In contrast, industrial combustion applications, for example, for sintering processes, heating of furnaces and domestic appliances such as boilers and cookers are more tolerant with respect to the hydrogen content and impurity levels resulting in fuel-types similar to "town gas" with hydrogen contents of around fifty percent. Generally, these higher impurity levels could facilitate hydrogen utilization by increasing the heating value but replacement by other components, for example, oxygen or carbon monoxide have to be considered carefully with regards to safety, decarbonization and cost-effective level of purity for end user applications and quality measurements.


## Frontiers in Energy Research

Six Summary

Hydrogen has the capacity to meet future emission targets by decarbonizing the industry, mobility, electricity, and heat generation. But, hydrogen utilization and the implementation of a hydrogen economy at large scale requires significant storage capacities. Underground hydrogen storage in porous geological structures has the potential to meet these storage requirements. Positive and cautionary indicators for safe hydrogen storage in porous structures were identified, and a comparison and linkage with existing and planned aboveground hydrogen infrastructures was established. We have identified porous sandstone formations located at depths ranging from eight hundred to one thousand one hundred meters and exhibiting temperatures exceeding forty degrees Celsius as highly promising reservoirs for hydrogen storage. Specifically, porosities exceeding twenty percent and permeabilities greater than five hundred millidarcies were identified as positive indicators for adequate storage capacity. Brine pH values below six and salinities above one hundred milligrams per liter are desirable for effective hydrogen storage that will minimize biotic and abiotic reactions. Based on our estimates, the total hydrogen storage capacity in underground natural gas facilities is projected to be as high as eight billion cubic meters, or equivalently, zero point seventy-two megatonnes at standard temperature and pressure. This capacity translates into a potential energy equivalent of twenty-nine terawatt hours of hydrogen. Additionally, saline aquifers could accommodate eighty-one point six to six hundred ninety-one point eight megatonnes of hydrogen, equivalent to an energy potential of three point two to twenty-seven point three petawatt hours of hydrogen that would meet predicted storage requirements many times over. Most of these sites are located in the North German Basin. We conclude that pore storage systems are likely to play a vital role in the future German hydrogen infrastructure, particularly in regions with significant demand for industrial hydrogen storage and potential imports via pipelines and ships. We recommend that future research focus on assessing the technical storage potential of these sites and their compatibility with planned hydrogen infrastructures and industrial demand.


## Data availability statement

The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article or Supplementary Material, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.


## Author contributions

KA designed the study. KA and BA organized the database. BA performed the thermophysical analysis. KA wrote the first draft of the manuscript. KA, BA, MG, and MN wrote sections of the manuscript. All authors contributed to manuscript revision, read, and approved the submitted. All authors listed have made a substantial, direct, and intellectual contribution to the work and approved it for publication.


## Funding

This work is part of the flagship project TransHyDE supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research with the grant number: zero three H Y two zero two H.

We thank Emily Bergup for graphical assistance and Dirk Boernecke for fruitful discussions. The original manuscript was improved by reviews by Bashirul Haq and Wei Liu.


## Frontiers in Energy Research

Conflict of interest

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


## Publisher's note

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.