## Paul Delaroche's Early Work in the Context of English History Painting Paul Delaroche's Early Work in the Context of English History Painting

This essay presents an argument that cuts across the generally accepted view of Anglo-French artistic exchanges during the first half of the nineteenth century. It directs attention to the career of a French painter whose death in eighteen fifty-six anticipated a drastic decline in a previously formidable reputation. A century and a half later, it is time to revisit the sources of Paul Delaroche's international celebrity, and in particular to review his strong connections with England, which have barely been explored up to now. Delaroche's Jane Grey was first shown at the Paris Salon of eighteen thirty-four, this being the fourth occasion since eighteen twenty-four at which he had exhibited major works that featured subjects from English history. This showing also offered the occasion for a forthright article by the prominent critic, Gustave Planche, who claimed to detect a similarity - highly suspicious in his view - between Delaroche's composition in Jane Grey and a print on a similar theme from the illustrated edition of David Hume's History of England, published by Robert Bowyer in the seventeen nineties. Planche compounded his accusation of plagiarism by pointing out that an earlier work by Delaroche, his Death of Elizabeth shown at the eighteen twenty-seven to twenty-eight Salon, had also used a visual source from Bowyer's edition of Hume. Planche terminated his attack by issuing a challenge to future scholars to track down the genealogy of other paintings by Delaroche in comparable print sources: 'so I leave to the erudite the task of discovering the origins in engraving of the master's other compositions'.

The erudite have hardly been eager to take up Planche's challenge, probably because of more pressing priorities. If I begin by rehearsing Planche's remarks, this is not with the purpose of denying that Delaroche's reliance on recent English prints was indeed very considerable, but to make the claim that his very reliance betokens a more profound affiliation on his part. Born in seventeen ninety-seven, Delaroche was the son of a noted picture dealer and expert. He was also related through his mother to the Joly family who, father and son, were in charge of the national print collection of France throughout the entire period of the Empire and Restoration. There is no difficulty in supposing that he would have had access to the prints in the Bowyer edition of Hume, or to the numerous prints from the Boydell Shakespeare Gallery that had preceded them in stimulating English artists to produce ambitious historical paintings, but the argument needs to be pressed to a further stage. The more substantial issue is how far Delaroche might have been guided in his development by this radically new mode of history painting that the print editions of both Bowyer and Boydell had summoned into existence.

It will be suggested here that Delaroche's role as 'choir-leader' of the new French historical school (as Heine would term him in eighteen thirty-one) was largely the result of his early immersion in this new manifestation of the genre, which set out a direction very different in spirit from the traditional approach of the French Académie des Beaux-Arts, to which he was elected in eighteen thirty-two. In brief, the issue to be explored is not whether Delaroche consulted English print sources, overtly or sotto voce, but how far his highly influential reorientation of 'genre historique' was attuned to his awareness of the ethos and practice of the upstart Academy on the other side of the channel.

This is not a possibility that has been investigated so far in any serious way, in spite of recent scholarly exploration of Anglo-French artistic exchanges over the Romantic period. Exhibitions in France and in the English-speaking world have retained their focus on those aspects of English influence that were already well acknowledged in the nineteenth century - and justifiably so. The landscapes of John Constable and the portraits of Sir Thomas Lawrence (to name only the most prominent English exponents of these two less prestigious genres) fuelled the debates of French critics from the eighteen twenties onwards, and influenced the practice of many French painters in ways that need no underlining here. Yet what of the English historical subjects that found their way, to a great extent through Delaroche's work, into the superior genre of history painting? The recent rediscovery of a small oil sketch for the Death of Elizabeth, which will be considered later, leaves us in no doubt that, in this particular case, Delaroche's starting point was an oil sketch that juggled with the composition of Robert Smirke's Queen Elizabeth Appointing her Successor (as engraved by James Neagle in seventeen ninety-six for the Hume edition). As has already been suggested, the connection with Hume was hardly disavowed by Delaroche, since he credited the historian's text in the salon livret. Yet such unequivocal evidence might seem to provide conclusive support for Planche's indictment of plagiarism, if it were not glossed by a more global interpretation of Delaroche's early development as an artist in the eighteen twenties.

Yet there is little prospect of reaching such an understanding from the study of contemporary sources, whether through combing the French criticism of the period, or through focusing on the authoritative accounts of Delaroche's career that would appear after his death in eighteen fifty-six. Planche's accusations of plagiarism were advanced in the eighteen thirties, and they may have played some role in influencing Delaroche's decision to withdraw from exhibiting in the Salon after eighteen thirty-seven. They had been completely forgotten by the eighteen fifties, but the more challenging proposition that Delaroche had immersed himself in English historical genre—that he had promoted his own career not just by copying English print sources, but by familiarising himself at first-hand with the cultural milieu in which they were produced—was not advanced at the time, and has not been investigated subsequently.

However, this view is far from implausible. To take one example that eluded Planche's critique, it is instructive to look at Delaroche's first major state commission, a prestigious assignment initially granted to his studio master, Baron Gros, but then diverted towards Delaroche by an official decision of February eighteen twenty-seven. The Taking of the Trocadéro (Salon of eighteen twenty-seven to twenty-eight: Musée de Versailles) was intended to commemorate what was being acclaimed as France's successful military intervention in Spain in eighteen twenty-three, under the leadership of the Duc d'Angoulême, nephew of the Bourbon King, Louis the Eighteenth, and elder son of Charles the Tenth, who was to succeed to the throne shortly afterwards. This campaign was highly important for the self-esteem of the French Government since it was


## Delaroche's Early Work and English History Painting

regarded as having reaffirmed their right to bear arms in Europe after the humiliating occupation by foreign troops that followed France's defeat at Waterloo in eighteen fifteen.

Contemporary French critics of Delaroche's painting inevitably compared this product of a young artist trained in Gros's studio with the magnificent pictorial record of warfare during the Revolution and Empire to which Gros and his fellow pupils from David's studio had valiantly contributed. Étienne Delécluze, himself a former pupil of David, commented on the nature of modern heroism as portrayed by Delaroche, which in his opinion struck a new note of 'resignation to danger'. He suggested that David himself had already begun to tread the same path in response to 'public events and the defection of taste' over the final years of the Empire. Yet to assimilate Delaroche to this final phase of David's imperial patronage is perhaps to miss the wider aspect of the conjuncture that had formed connections between English history painting and the French neoclassical