## JACIS JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY

General Kinetic Model for pH Dependence of Proton-Coupled Electron Transfer: Application to an Electrochemical Water Oxidation System


## INTRODUCTION

Proton-coupled electron transfer reactions are ubiquitous and crucial steps in chemical, biological, and catalytic processes. Understanding the mechanistic details of proton-coupled electron transfer reactions can allow control of these processes. A powerful mechanistic probe is the pH dependence of proton-coupled electron transfer reaction rates in aqueous solution. For example, a pH-independent apparent rate constant often indicates either a sequential mechanism with rate-limiting electron transfer or a concerted mechanism with water as the proton donor or acceptor. If the apparent rate constant K increases or decreases tenfold per pH unit, hydronium or hydroxide are often assumed to be the sole proton donor or acceptor, and a plot of log K versus pH should have a slope of plus or minus one. However, in several studies, a much weaker pH dependence of the proton-coupled electron transfer apparent rate constant has been observed. These examples include the homogeneous oxidation of tyrosine and tryptophan, as well as the interfacial reduction of ruthenium-based water oxidation catalysts. However, an explanation for these weak pH dependencies remains elusive. Herein, we will show that the weak pH dependence of some proton-coupled electron transfer reactions can be explained in terms of a competition among multiple mechanisms.

The idea of competing reactions has a long history in the proton-coupled electron transfer literature. Laviron developed a model to describe the pH dependence of the apparent standard rate constant for stepwise, electrochemical proton-coupled electron transfer reactions. In this model, the competition between two electron transfer reactions involving the protonated or deprotonated redox species is considered. The resulting pH-dependent standard rate constant has two plateaus at low and high pH limits connected by a V-shape curve. In the intermediate pH region, the rate constant first decreases due to the depletion of the protonated form and then increases due to the growing contribution from the deprotonated form, resulting in the V-shape curve. This model was then generalized by Finklea to stepwise multiproton multielectron proton-coupled electron transfer reactions. In addition to the stepwise case, recently, the Surendranath group developed a model that considers the competition between two concerted pathways with different proton donors on a graphitic conjugated catalyst interface. The predicted pH-dependent apparent standard rate constant also has a V-shape, which agrees with the experimental results. All of these models were developed for electrochemical proton-coupled electron transfer reactions and rely on the Butler-Volmer equation. Furthermore, Costentin and coworkers developed competing reaction-based pH-dependent models for homogeneous proton-coupled electron transfer reactions with water as the proton donor or acceptor. Their work discussed various cases, such as the competition between concerted pathways with proton transfer within a local water cluster or directly to bulk solvent, the competition between concerted and stepwise pathways, and reactions involving buffer.

In this paper, we introduce a general, multichannel kinetic model to describe the pH dependence of homogeneous and heterogeneous proton-coupled electron transfer. This model yields a general expression for the pH-dependent apparent rate constants of both homogeneous proton-coupled electron transfer in solution and electrochemical proton-coupled electron transfer. The core concept of this model is that several electron transfer and proton-coupled electron transfer channels are accessible and actively contribute to the overall proton-coupled electron transfer process. The contribution of each channel is strongly influenced by the relative populations of the different forms of the redox species (i.e., protonated or deprotonated and various hydrogen-bonded complexes with the proton donor or acceptor). These populations, described by the mole fractions, are pH-dependent and therefore lead to a complex dependence of the apparent rate constants on pH. Furthermore, we employ this model to describe experimentally measured pH-dependent kinetic data for a representative interfacial electrochemical proton-coupled electron transfer reaction, namely, reduction of a ruthenium-based water oxidation catalyst attached to a tin-doped indium two oxide surface. Our model explains the origins of the previously observed weak pH dependence of proton-coupled electron transfer for this system using physically meaningful parameters. Moreover, our model's predicted behavior for a wider pH range is then confirmed by additional experiments. This example highlights the importance of considering all possible reaction channels instead of just the dominant channel when analyzing experimental proton-coupled electron transfer kinetic data. Although this application focuses on electrochemical proton-coupled electron transfer, a future study will focus on applications of this kinetic model to homogeneous proton-coupled electron transfer systems.


## THEORY

We use the four-channel model shown in Figure one as a typical example. Derivations for the general cases are provided in the Supporting Information. In our model, both the oxidized and reduced species can exist in protonated and deprotonated forms: Ox, OxH+, Red, and RedH. These species can be converted to each other via electron transfer and proton transfer to or from an external source. The edges of the square diagram in Figure one represent sequential electron transfer proton transfer or proton transfer electron transfer pathways, and the diagonals of this diagram represent the concerted electron-proton transfer pathways. Herein, the term proton-coupled electron transfer encompasses both sequential and concerted mechanisms, and the term electron-proton transfer indicates concerted proton-coupled electron transfer. Assuming that buffer ions do not participate in the concerted pathways, either a hydronium ion H3O+ or a water molecule can serve as the proton donor for the reduction reaction, and either a water molecule or a hydroxide ion OH can serve as the proton acceptor for the oxidation reaction. If H3O+ or OH is the proton donor or acceptor in the concerted mechanism, the redox species must first form a hydrogen- bonded complex with the ion. These hydrogen-bonded complexes are denoted as {Ox ... H3O+} and {RedH ... OH}. The formation of these complexes is shown with black double arrows in Figure one, requiring the displacement of a water molecule by either H3O+ or OH. On the other hand, if water is the proton donor or acceptor in the concerted mechanism, these additional hydrogen bond formation steps are not needed because the complexes with water are already formed upon solvation.

Next, we explicitly write the chemical reactions shown in Figure one. For the remainder of this paper, we use the following convention. For electron transfer, proton transfer, and complex formation reactions, water is considered as a solvent, and the notation {X ... H2O} is dropped. For concerted electron-proton transfer reactions, the notation {X ... H2O} must be written explicitly to ensure mass conservation. The electron transfer and electron-proton transfer channels (half reactions) are characterized by their standard potentials and rate constants, as given by the following expressions

OxH+ + e RedH, EEPT1

(one a)

Ox + e- Red, EEPT2

(one b)

Red Ox {RedH ... H2O}, EEPT1

{Ox ... H3O+} + e KEPT1 Red

(one c)

{Ox ... H2O} + e- KEPT2 Ox {RedH ... OH}, EEPT2 (one d)

Here, we consider a scenario in which the proton transfer and complex formation steps are at equilibrium and are characterized by the corresponding equilibrium constants

OxH+ Ox + H+, Ka,Ox = [Ox][H+] [OxH+] [Red] [H+] RedH = Red + H+, Ka,Red = [RedH]

(two a)

(two b)

Ox + H3O+ = {Ox ... H3O+}, K1 = [Ox][H3O+] [Ox ... H3O+] (two c)

P H P H Figure two. Representative illustrations of (a) E sub a p p superscript O left parenthesis b right parenthesis K sub a p p for electrochemical reactions at a specific potential, (c) K sub s sub a p p for electrochemical reactions with the Butler-Volmer model, and (d) K sub max , a p for electrochemical reactions with the Marcus-Gerischer model as functions of P H. These data were generated with the model described in Figure one and the associated equations given in the text. In these plots, P K a , Ox equals three , P K a , Red equals eleven, P K sub one equals negative one, and P K sub two equals negative six. The standard potential (vs N H E) of each channel is E sub F T one superscript zero equals one point zero zero volts sub one, E sub F T two superscript zero equals zero point five three volts, E sub F P T one superscript O equals one point one two volts, E sub E D T two superscript O equals zero point seven zero volts. Other parameters used for each plot are given in Table S one.

Red H plus O H superscript negative rightleftharpoons left brace Red H center dot center dot center dot O H superscript negative right brace , K sub two equals fraction numerator left bracket Red H center dot center dot center dot O H superscript negative right bracket divided by left bracket Red H right bracket left bracket O H superscript negative right bracket end fraction (two d)

Equations two a and two b describe PT steps, corresponding to the blue arrows in Figure one. Equations two c and two d describe the hydrogen-bonded complex formation steps, corresponding to the black arrows in Figure one. In aqueous solution, we also consider the water dissociation equilibrium

H sub two O Rightarrow H superscript plus plus O H superscript negative , K sub w equals left bracket H superscript plus right bracket left bracket O H superscript negative right bracket equals ten superscript negative fourteen (three)

This scenario, which is based on the equilibrium assumptions, is valid when PT and complex formation reactions are much faster than ET and EPT or when ET and EPT are photoinduced after sufficient mixing of the reactants.

The ET and EPT channels in Figure one can occur either electrochemically at an electrode surface or homogeneously with an external molecular reductant or oxidant. The following derivation will focus on electrochemical PCET, but the same equations have been adapted for homogeneous PCET.

For the half-reaction Ox plus e superscript negative equals Red superscript negative , the concentrations of the oxidized and reduced species at the standard potential E superscript circle are equal: [Ox] equals [Red-]. Here, we neglect the difference between activities and concentrations and avoid introduction of the formal potential. For more complicated systems such as the four-channel model shown in Figure one, each redox species can exist in different forms. In this case, we can define the apparent standard potential E sub a p superscript O for each channel as the potential when the total concentrations of the oxidized and reduced species are equal: left bracket Ox sub total right bracket equals left bracket Red sub total right bracket. In the general case, for the ith channel, E sub a p p , i superscript O can be calculated from the corresponding standard potential via the Nernst equation

E sub app , i superscript circle equals E sub i superscript circle minus fraction numerator R T divided by F end fraction ln fraction numerator Z sub Red sub i divided by Z sub Ox sub i end fraction . (four)

where R is the universal gas constant, T is the temperature, and F is the Faraday constant. Here, script X Ox , and script X sub Red , are the mole fractions of Ox; and Red, respectively, which are defined as the ratios between the concentration of the ith form and the total concentration chi sub O X sub i equals fraction left bracket O X sub i right bracket, left bracket O X sub tot right bracket, equals fraction left bracket O X sub i right bracket, summation sub j, left bracket O X sub j right bracket (five a)

chi sub Red sub i equals fraction left bracket Red sub i right bracket, left bracket Red sub tot right bracket, equals fraction left bracket Red sub i right bracket, summation sub j, left bracket Red sub j right bracket (five b)

Under the equilibrium assumption for the P T and complex formation steps, we can explicitly express chi O X and chi sub Red for each form as a function of p H using the corresponding equilibrium constants (i.e., K sub a,Ox, K sub a,Red, K sub one, K sub two, and K sub w in this example) as parameters. Moreover, the reactions in Figure one form a complete thermodynamic cycle, and therefore the standard potentials E sub i sup circle are related to each other through the same equilibrium constants. Under the equilibrium approximation, we can show that for any two channels i,

j, E sub app, i sup o equals E sub app j sup o, for all i, j (six).

Thus, for a multichannel P C E T reaction system such as the one in Figure one, there will be only one unique apparent potential. The full derivations and expressions associated with equations four to six are provided in the Supporting Information.

curves show the cases of including only the sequential or only the concerted pathways in Figure one. For all three cases, the curve has the expected shape. For the sequential-only case, when pH is less than p K a,Ox, E app equals E E T one; at intermediate pH, E app decreases linearly as pH increases with a slope of fifty-nine mV per pH unit; when pH is greater than p K a,Red, E app equals E E T two. For the concerted- only case, E app has the same behavior, but the upper and lower bounds become E g P T one and E g P T two, and the transition points become negative pK one and pK two plus pK w respectively. The slope at intermediate pH is still fifty-nine mV per pH unit. When both mechanisms are considered, the resulting curve can be seen as connecting pieces of the two black curves. The plateau value at low pH is the lower potential of E L T one versus E L P T one with a turning point at the larger value of negative pK one versus p K a,Ox. The plateau value at high pH is the higher potential of E L T two versus E P T two with a turning point at the lower value of pK two plus pK w versus p K a,Red.

Next, we move on to the derivation of the apparent rate constants. Here, we assume that each form of the reduced or oxidized species is not distinguished in kinetics experiments, and only the total reduction or oxidation rate is measured. Although some forms may be distinguishable because they have distinct spectra, formulating the equations in this manner provides a general approach for kinetic analysis.

For an electrochemical reaction, E T occurs between the main redox species undergoing P C E T and the electrode. In this case, the total reduction and oxidation rates of all forms of the redox species are

"Red(E) equals summation k,Red(E) left bracket Ox right bracket i.

(seven a)

rox(E) equals summation k,Ox(E) left bracket Red right bracket i.

(seven b)

where k Red(E) and k ox(E) are the reduction and oxidation rate constants of the ith channel and E is the electrode potential. These rate constants are potential-dependent and are related to each other via the reaction free energy A G equals F(E minus E app).

k x(E) k Red(E) equals F(E minus E) R T (eight).

L N.

These total reaction rates can be written as the product of an apparent rate constant, k Red or k ox, K app, and the total concentration of the redox species left bracket O X tot right bracket or left bracket Red tot right bracket. The resulting apparent rate constants are the weighted averages of the rate constants of each redox channel, where the weights are the mole fractions of the corresponding reactants.

k Red(E) equals summation i.

Red(E) X ox. (nine a)

k app(E) equals summation k, Ox(E) X Red, i. (nine b)

(nine b)

Given these expressions, it can be shown that

L N K app (E) equals F(E minus E app) R T (ten).

k Ox(E).

Equations nine a, nine b, and ten hold for any kinetic models describing k Red(E) and k ox(E), including the widely used Butler-Volmer (B V) and Marcus-Gerischer (M G) models. Although both the B V and M G models


## Article.

were originally derived for ET reactions, they can be extended to concerted PCET reactions. The BV model assumes a linear free energy relationship, where the ET free energy barrier is proportional to the ET driving force, and can be generalized to concerted PCET reactions by replacing the redox potential with the proton-coupled redox potential in the expressions. Moreover, we have shown that the MG theory can be extended to describe concerted PCET reactions within the framework of our vibronically nonadiabatic PCET theory by including the transitions between all reactant and product vibronic states. Figure two b shows the potential-dependent kad and kopp as functions of pH at a given electrode potential. The oxidation apparent rate constant has a slope of ninety percent equals one, whereas the reduction apparent rate constant has a slope of zero point six three, which is less than unity, indicating that the reduction reaction has a weaker pH dependence. In general, both reduction and oxidation reactions can exhibit weak pH dependence in this model. A detailed analysis of this figure is provided in the supporting information.

There are also multiple ways to define a potential-independent rate constant. The standard rate constant ks is defined as the rate constant when E equals E naught. At this potential, the reaction free energy AG equals F times the quantity of E minus E naught equals zero so kRed equals kox equals ks. Alternatively, if the reaction rate constant saturates at very negative or positive potentials, maximum rate constants k max for reduction and oxidation can be defined at E approaches positive or negative infinity. Similarly, we can define the potential-independent apparent standard rate constant and apparent maximum rate constants as

Ks,app equals kapp parentheses Eapp parentheses equals k times Ox Px parentheses Eapp parentheses equals k Red parentheses Kapp parentheses E approaches negative infinity parentheses

Here, Eapp is the apparent standard potential defined in equation four. In practice, kmax,app can also be defined at the experimental potential limits. The apparent standard or maximum rate constants can then be obtained by substituting the expressions for kRed parentheses E parentheses and ko parentheses E parentheses into equations nine a and nine b and setting E equals Eapp or positive or negative infinity. The general expressions for ks,app and Kmax,app provided in the supporting information. For the BV and MG kinetic models, the results are presented in Table one. Representative illustrations of these cases are shown in Figure two c,d, and detailed analyses are provided in the supporting information.

To conclude this section, we summarize the expressions for the apparent rate constants for both homogeneous and electrochemical PCET reactions in Table one. Note that these equations are not limited to the four-channel case shown in Figure one. Certain channels can be shut down by excluding the corresponding form of Ox and Red or setting certain k equals zero. For example, if we exclude all concerted pathways in Figure one and apply the equation for BV kinetics ksapp and s,app, this model is reduced to Laviron's model, and we obtain the same expression for the apparent standard rate constant. More generally, other channels could be added, such as concerted pathways with buffer as the proton donor or acceptor, and the assumption of equilibrium for PT and complex formation could be removed, leading to more complex kinetic equations.

P subscript max, app superscript MG, Ox equals the sum over i of P subscript max, i X subscript Red raised to the power of a alpha subscript i and P subscript s, i are the cathodic transfer coefficient and the standard rate constant for the ith channel, respectively. P subscript k subscript max i is the maximum rate constant for the ith channel.


## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

We applied our model to an electrochemical PCET reaction, namely, PCET to a Ruthenium-based water oxidation catalyst attached to an indium tin oxide surface. As discussed above, the apparent rate constant of an electrochemical PCET reaction is not only pH-dependent but also potential-dependent. Kessinger et al. studied the interfacial ET and PCET reactions in a Ruthenium-based water oxidation catalyst, Ruthenium two complexed to two tpy and bpy groups, attached to indium tin oxide. Photoexcitation of Ruthenium two complexed to OH two results in rapid electron transfer to the indium tin oxide electrode, producing Ruthenium three complexed to OH two or OH with a protonation state that is dependent on the solution pH. The resulting back electron transfer reaction from indium tin oxide to Ruthenium three complexed to OH two or deprotonated OH that regenerates Ruthenium two complexed to OH two therefore occurs via an ET and or a PCET pathway. This reduction reaction was monitored using transient absorption spectroscopy by measuring the recovery of the metal-to-ligand charge-transfer absorption peak of left curly bracket O x dot dot dot H sub three O plus right curly bracket left curly bracket R u superscript three plus dash O H minus dot dot dot H sub three O plus right curly bracket left curly bracket R e d H dot dot dot H sub two O right curly bracket left curly bracket O x dot dot dot H sub two O right curly bracket left curly bracket R u double prime dash O H sub two dot dot dot H sub two O right curly bracket left curly bracket R u triple prime dash O H minus dot dot dot H sub two O right curly bracket left curly bracket R e d H dot dot dot O H minus right curly bracket left curly bracket R u superscript two dash O H sub two dot dot dot O H minus right curly bracket Figure Three. Reaction mechanisms of the two E T and two EPT channels for the water oxidation catalyst undergoing electrochemical P C E T. Schematic structures of O x, OxH+, Red-, RedH, and the associated complexes are labeled. The transferring proton is colored red. The charge given for each species includes the H sub three O plus and O H minus charges, which are therefore not shown explicitly.


## Article

The apparent reduction rate constants k sub a p p superscript R e d were measured at p H equals one, three, and five at various applied potentials, thereby altering the driving force negative Delta G naught. The potential-dependent apparent rate constant of this interfacial E T slash P C E T system can be described by the MG theory, where the rate constant plateaus at a large driving force. Based on the experimentally measured p K sub a of the R u superscript three plus dash O H sub two complex attached to I T O, the mechanism was presumed to be E T at p H equals one but P C E T at p H equals three and five. At low p H, the axial ligand coordinated to R u is H sub two O, and therefore only E T is possible, but at higher p H, the ligand coordinated to R u is O H, and E T is accompanied by proton transfer to the O H ligand to generate a water ligand. A weak p H dependence was observed for the overall process. When the p H increases from three to five, the maximum rate constant only decreases by around three-fold rather than decreasing one hundred-fold, as would be expected according to a model based on a single P C E T pathway with H sub three O plus as the proton donor, or being p H-independent, as would be expected according to a model based on a single P C E T pathway with H sub two O as the proton donor.

R u superscript two plus dash O H sub two. Here, we focus on the P C E T process associated with the reduction of the R u superscript three plus catalyst attached to I T O. The two E T and two EPT channels, as well as O x, OxH+, Red, and RedH for this process, are depicted in Figure Three. As no buffer solution was added in the experiments, the diagram in Figure One gives a complete set of the possible E T and EPT channels in this system, which is recreated using system-specific notation in Figure Four. The experimental rate constant was obtained by analyzing the absorbance change of the R u superscript two plus catalyst (the product) as a function of time. In this system, the R u superscript three plus catalyst, which is the reactant, is generated by photoexcitation. The equilibrium assumption thus requires P T and complex association to be faster than E T and EPT. This assumption is reasonable for this system in the p H and potential range studied experimentally (see the S I). Note that the experimental measurement of the change in total concentration of the reduced species (i.e., the R u superscript two plus catalyst) is consistent with our kinetic model, which tracks the total concentrations of the reduced and oxidized species.

Prior to analyzing the experimental data, we introduce certain physically motivated assumptions regarding the parameters. We can estimate the values of K sub one and K sub two using density functional theory calculations in conjunction with the experimentally measured p K sub a, O x and p K sub a Red. These calculations lead to estimates of K sub one approximately ten to the power of zero point two and K sub two less than ten to the power of four point five. Furthermore, since the potential-dependent rate constant can be well described by MG theory, the maximum rate constant has the same expression for both E T and

EPT superscript nineteen k sub max equals open parenthesis two pi divided by h bar close parenthesis rho open parenthesis epsilon sub F close parenthesis absolute value V sub e l absolute value squared where P rho left open epsilon sub F right close is the density of states at the Fermi level of the electrode and V sub e l is the electronic coupling between the electrode and the redox molecule. For a surface-attached molecule, it is reasonable to assume that the electronic coupling is approximately the same if the ligands are the same for the reactant species. Therefore, we will assume that k sub max, ET two equals k sub max, EPT one equals k sub max, EPT two because the ligand is OH for the reactant in each of the three channels (Figure three).

For electrochemical systems, the apparent P K a of a surface-attached molecule has been reported to depend on an applied potential. When the potential becomes more negative, the negative charge accumulating on the electrode surface will disfavor deprotonation of the attached catalyst. This potential-


## Article

dependent behavior has been observed in experiments on metal surfaces and described in terms of an increase of approximately zero point ten P K a unit per fifty-nine millivolts of potential decrease. I T O, a degenerate semiconductor, is expected to exhibit similar behavior due to its metal-like conductivity and carrier density (approximately ten to the twenty centimeters to the negative third power). For the I T O-Ru system, the P K a, O x is measured to be one point two at one point one volts versus N H E, and the apparent rate constant reaches its maximum value in the range of negative zero point one to positive zero point one volts versus N H E for P H of one, three, or five (symbols in Figure five a). To reproduce the experimental data with our model, we used a slope of a equals zero point twelve P K a unit per fifty-nine millivolts of potential decrease, similar to previous findings. Thus, the potential dependence of P K a, O x was modeled as

P K a , O x left E right equals negative zero point twelve times the fraction of E minus one point one volts over zero point zero five nine volts plus one point two.

Note that this potential dependence on I T O has not been experimentally verified. Anchoring a Ru second power water oxidation catalyst with a P H-sensitive visible absorption spectrum to the surface and monitoring its spectral behavior with an applied potential could provide useful insights. We also investigated models where P K a, O x is independent of the potential E and found that such models could only reproduce the experimental data at higher P E to the H power, such as P H equals five, but not for the entire P H range (Figure S five). For the I T O-Ru system, P K a, Red cannot be measured for the attached complex due to the instability of the phosphonate anchoring group at P H greater than five. We also used equation thirteen to describe the potential dependence of P K a, Red with a value of eight point two at one point one volts, which will give a value of approximately nine point two at E sub ET two superscript o to be consistent with the Pourbaix diagram of the free complex in solution. We found that the results using a higher value could not reproduce the results at P H equals five.

This potential-dependent apparent P K sub A of the surface-attached species can also be viewed in terms of a potential-dependent work term due to bringing a proton to the interfacial region. A similar work term is necessary for the E T steps for the same physical reason and to ensure that the overall free energy of the P C E T process is independent of path. Therefore, this work term was added to all of the E T and P T steps. Including these work terms for the diagonal steps does not alter the results because they effectively cancel. These work terms are effectively accounting for nonideal behavior at the interface. The impact of the potential dependence of the apparent P K sub C values on the pH dependence of the apparent potential is negligible and is not expected to be experimentally observable for this system.

Within the M G theory, the potential-dependent apparent rate constant can be expressed as

K superscript M G, Red left parenthesis E right parenthesis equals K sub max times one half left bracket one minus error function left parenthesis F left parenthesis E minus E superscript zero right parenthesis plus lambda divided by two square root lambda R T right parenthesis right bracket.

where lambda is the reorganization energy. The apparent reorganization energy can be defined as the driving force corresponding to the potential at which this rate constant reaches half its maximum value (i.e., K superscript M G, Red left parenthesis E right parenthesis divided by K sub max equals one half when F left parenthesis E superscript zero minus E right parenthesis equals lambda. Using the rate constant expression of the M G theory, Equation nine A becomes

K sub apparent superscript M G, Red left parenthesis E, pH right parenthesis equals the sum of K sub max, I times one half left bracket one minus error function left parenthesis F left parenthesis E minus E sub I superscript zero right parenthesis plus lambda sub I divided by two square root A sub I R T right parenthesis right bracket times chi sub O x sub I left parenthesis pH; P K sub A, O x left parenthesis E right parenthesis right parenthesis.

We estimated the total reorganization energies for E T and E P T to be zero point thirty-seven and one point zero one electron volts, respectively, based on our previous calculations. In this previous work, the outer-sphere (solvent) reorganization energy was computed using a dielectric continuum model with a cylindrical cavity containing a point charge representing the molecular catalyst, as well as the bridge attaching it to the electrode surface. The resulting outer-sphere reorganization energy was computed to be zero point twenty-one electron volts and was assumed to be the same for E T and E P T. In this previous work, the inner-sphere (solute) reorganization energies were computed using the fourpoint method for E T fifty-two and the modified four-point method for E P T. Geometry optimizations of the oxidized and reduced forms of the molecular catalyst and single-point energy calculations of each geometry in the alternative redox state, as well as optimization of the proton position for E P T, were performed using D F T. For E T, the axial ligand is H two O in the oxidized and reduced states, whereas for E P T, the axial ligand is O H in the oxidized state and H two O in the reduced state. The inner-sphere reorganization energies were computed to be zero point sixteen and zero point fifty-four electron volts for E T and E P T, respectively. The substantial difference arises from the larger change in the distance between Ru and the oxygen of the axial ligand for E P T than for E T zero point nineteen angstroms for E P T versus zero point zero six angstroms for E T. The total reorganization energy, which is the sum of the inner- and outer-sphere components, computed for E T is in agreement with experimental measurements at low pH, where only the E T channel is accessible. The total reorganization energy for E P T is an effective value where the contributions of excited proton vibrational states are also included. A model using lambda sub E P T without considering the excited proton vibrational states is provided in the S I.

point method for <LATEX>\mathrm { E T } ^ { 5 2 }</LATEX> and the modified four-point method for EPT.53 Geometry optimizations of the oxidized and reduced forms of the molecular catalyst and single-point energy calculations of each geometry in the alternative redox state, as well as optimization of the proton position for EPT, were performed using DFT. For ET, the axial ligand is <LATEX>H _ { 2 } O</LATEX> in the oxidized and reduced states, whereas for EPT, the axial ligand <LATEX>i s \quad O H \quad i n \quad t h e</LATEX> oxidized state and H2O in the reduced state. The inner-sphere reorganization energies were computed to be 0.16 and 0.54 eV for ET and EPT, respectively. The substantial difference arises from the larger change in the distance between Ru and the oxygen of the axial ligand for EPT than for ET (0.19 Å for EPT versus 0.06 Å for ET). The total reorganization energy, which is the sum of the inner- and outer-sphere components, computed for ET is in agreement with experimental measurements at low <LATEX>\mathrm { p H } ,</LATEX> where only the ET channel is accessible.19 The total reorganization energy for EPT is an effective value where the contributions of excited proton vibrational states are also included. A model using <LATEX>\lambda _ { \mathrm { E P T } }</LATEX> without considering the excited proton vibrational states is provided in the SI (Figure S7).

Using the parameter values provided and explained in Table S two, we are able to model the pH and potential dependence of the apparent P C E T rate constant, as shown in Figure five. Figure five A shows qualitatively reasonable agreement with the experimental data in this potential and pH range using Equation fifteen. The weak pH dependence of K sub max, apparent is correctly described, and the curves for pH equals three and five are shifted toward lower potentials compared to the curve for pH equals one, indicating larger apparent reorganization energies for pH equals three and five. Note that this apparent reorganization energy reflects the summation over channels in equation fifteen and thus is not as easily interpreted as in equation fourteen, as discussed further below. One source of the quantitative deviations could be the use of the error function expression in equation fifteen. In this expression, we assume that the app as a function of the solution pH. The y-error bars represent one standard deviation from the average of three separate electrode measurements, while the x-error bars represent one standard deviation from the average pH recorded for the electrolyte solution both before and after the experiment for each of the three trials. The red curve was generated with the kinetic model using the parameters given in Table S three.

density of states of the electrode is constant, and the electronic coupling is the same for all electrode energy levels, but these assumptions may not be rigorously valid for real systems. On the other hand, the agreement with the experimental data at P H equals one can be significantly improved if we adjust K one. Moreover, the slight increase of the P H equals five curve in Figure five A at around negative zero point two volts versus N H E does not appear when a larger ŻEPT is used. Figure five B shows the apparent maximum rate constant as a function of P H. Here, the apparent maximum rate constant is defined at the lowest potential reached in the experiment, E equals negative zero point one volts, instead of E equals zero zero, because not all channels reach saturation in the experimental potential range. Using the same parameters as in Figure five A, we predict that the apparent maximum P C E T rate constant will become P H-independent at high P H. This prediction is confirmed by experimental measurements, as discussed below.

To understand the origin of the weak P H dependence of K max app, we analyzed the contributions of each channel at P H equals one, three, and five as a function of potential. With the equilibrium assumption, when P H is less than P K a Red, any Ru three plus O H Red formed through E T two will nearly instantaneously be protonated to form Ru three plus O H two Red H. Therefore, E T two is a P C E T channel occurring by the E T P T mechanism. In principle, E T one is associated with a P C E T channel occurring by the P T E T mechanism, where the protonation occurs via a pre-equilibrium process. The contribution of each channel to the total rate constant is determined by both the mole fractions

Article of the reactant forms Xox and their corresponding rate constants. For this system, our previous work showed that the total reorganization energy is significantly larger for E P T than for E T, as discussed above, leading to a higher free energy barrier for the E P T steps. As a result, the E T rate constants are significantly larger than the E P T rate constants at a given electrode potential. Moreover, at a given potential, E T one is faster than E T two because it has a more positive reduction potential, that is, a larger driving force.

At P H equals one, the E T one channel dominates over the entire range of potentials considered. The concentration of Ru three plus O H minus Ox is much smaller than Ru three plus O H two Ox H plus over this potential range because the potential-dependent P K a Ox is always greater than the P H. Therefore, the E T two, E P T one, and E P T two channels are not accessible due to the low concentration of Ox, especially at negative potentials. Thus, the E T one channel dominates at P H equals one.

At P H equals three, the E T one channel still dominates, although the E T two P T channel also contributes to a smaller extent at less positive potentials. The concentration of Ru three plus O H two is negligible at one point one volts versus N H E because P K a Ox equals one point two at this potential, thereby inhibiting contributions from the E T one channel at this potential. Assuming the potential dependence of P K a Ox given in equation thirteen, however, the concentrations of Ru four plus O H two and Ru three plus O H become comparable at less positive potentials. Since E T one is much faster than the other channels for reasons discussed above, the E T one channel dominates the reduction at P H equals three. The E T two P T channel contributes in the region of potential at which F of E is approximately equal to negative lambda E T due to the error function form of the rate constant in equation fourteen.

At pH equals five, the ET2-PT channel dominates over the entire range of potentials considered. The concentration of Ru three plus OH two at this pH is much smaller, virtually eliminating the contribution from the ET1 channel. The EPT1 channel is also not accessible because the mole fraction of Ru three plus OH minus dot dot dot H3O plus is negligible at this pH. Moreover, ET2 is much faster than EPT2 due to its smaller reorganization energy. For these reasons, the ET2-PT channel is dominant at pH equals five. P H equals S pH equals one, three, five, the two major competing channels are the ET1 and ET2 channels, corresponding to PCET via the PTET and ETPT mechanisms, respectively. Both the ET1 and ET2 rate constants are pH-independent. The ET1 channel dominates at pH equals one and three, whereas the ET2-PT channel dominates at pH equals five. This interpretation is supported by the experimentally measured maximum rate constants and corresponding electronic coupling H a b, which are similar at pH equals one and three but significantly different at pH equals five. This experimental observation is consistent with the same dominant channel at pH equals one and three but a different dominant channel at pH equals five. The weak pH dependence observed experimentally arises from the intrinsic difference between the rate constants of the ET1 and ET2-PT channels due to their distinct electronic coupling and the change of their relative contributions with pH due to the changes in the mole fractions of Ru three plus OH minus and

Ru three plus OH two. This analysis also provides insights into the change of apparent reorganization energy at pH equals one, three, and five. The apparent reorganization energy is extracted as the driving force when k app equals one half k max app. At pH equals three and five, the k E curve is shifted toward lower potential compared to the curve at pH equals one, leading to larger apparent reorganization energies for pH equals three and five compared to pH equals one. These observations could be interpreted to suggest the same mechanism at pH equals three and five and a different mechanism at pH equals one. However, our general model suggests an alternative interpretation. The dominant channel is the same at pH equals one and pH equals three, and the curve shift for pH equals three leading to a higher apparent reorganization energy is due to the negligible mole fraction of Ru three plus OH two at high potentials and the increased mole fraction of Ru three plus OH two at lower potentials. At pH equals five, the ET2-PT channel dominates, and the difference in reduction potential for ET2 compared to ET1 leads to the curve shift. It is somewhat fortuitous that the apparent reorganization energy is nearly the same at pH equals three and five.

Finally, we designed new experiments to test the model prediction of k max app at higher pH. Figure seven a shows the structures of the catalyst when anchored to a metal oxide electrode. In the previous study, phosphonate anchor groups, top, were used. These anchors are unstable at pH greater than five, thus prohibiting electrochemical PCET kinetics measurement at higher pH. Here, we prepared a new Ru-based water catalyst with siloxane anchor groups, bottom in Figure seven a. Detailed synthetic procedures and characterizations are provided in the Supporting Information. The siloxane anchor is stable over a much wider pH range of zero point five to twelve, allowing us to quantify the pH dependence over the entire pH range. Similar to the previously studied catalyst, when anchored on the indium tin oxide surface, this new Ru two plus catalyst also has an MLCT absorption band centered around four hundred ninety-five nanometers. When a positive potential sufficient to oxidize the ruthenium center from Ru two plus to Ru three plus is applied to the film, this feature is attenuated, indicating oxidation of the ruthenium center.

Using transient absorption spectroscopy and monitoring the recovery of the MLCT absorption of the R u two plus complex, the interfacial ET and PCET reaction kinetics were quantified from pH zero point seven to six point eight. The kinetics as a function of the applied potential for the reaction at each pH are provided in Figure seven C, and a plot of the maximum rate constant for the PCET reaction as a function of pH is shown in Figure seven D. For pH less than five, we observed the same behavior as in our previous study. The K subscript a p p left parenthesis E right parenthesis curves for pH greater than three are shifted toward lower potentials compared to the curve for pH equals zero point seven. For the maximum rate constant, the value at pH equals three point one zero is similar to that at pH equals zero point seven, and a weak decrease is observed in the pH range of three to five. On the other hand, the K subscript a p p left parenthesis E right parenthesis curves for pH equals six point six three is right on top of the curve at pH equals five point eight nine, indicating pH independence in this pH range. The plot of K subscript m a x comma a p p also levels off when pH is greater than five. These experimental observations provide validation for our model prediction that the apparent maximum PCET rate constant will become pH-independent at higher


## pH. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we developed a multichannel kinetic model to describe the pH dependence of PCET reactions. The apparent standard potential and apparent rate constant can be expressed as functions of the mole fractions of different forms of the reactant (i.e., the protonated and deprotonated forms), which in turn depend on pH. We derived the general expressions for the apparent rate constants of both homogeneous and electrochemical PCET reactions and the specific expressions corresponding to Butler-Volmer and Marcus-Gerischer kinetics. The power of this model is that the multiple competing channels encompass both sequential and concerted mechanisms and, in contrast to common square schemes, the possibility of more than one proton donor and acceptor.

We also applied this model to the light-initiated electro- chemical reduction of an ITO-attached Ru-based water oxidation catalyst and explained the experimentally observed weak pH dependence of the maximum rate constant for pH between one and five. Our analysis indicates that the hydronium ion is not directly involved in a concerted PCET reaction involving proton transfer from the hydronium to a hydroxide axial ligand upon reduction of the ruthenium center. Instead, our analysis suggests that the dominant channels are either ET, where the axial ligand is water, or PCET via an ETPT mechanism, where reduction of the ruthenium is followed quickly by protonation of the hydroxide axial ligand. At low pH, the dominant channel is ET, whereas at higher pH, the mechanism becomes PCET via the ETPT mechanism. The observed pH dependence arises from the intrinsic difference between the rate constants of these two channels and the dependence of their relative contributions, as determined by the reactant mole fractions, on pH. Our model also predicts that the maximum rate constant will become pH-independent at higher pH. This prediction was confirmed by our experiments for this water oxidation catalyst attached to ITO

by siloxane anchor groups, where the maximum rate constant is clearly pH-independent at pH greater than five.

Although this specific model is consistent with the experimental data and its prediction was validated, we cannot rule out the possibility that other models might yield similar results. In particular, the assumption of a potential-dependent pKa,Ox has not been verified on an ITO surface. In addition, our calculations assumed that the rate constants can be described by MG theory and that the electronic coupling is the same for the ET two, EPT one, and EPT two channels. The association equilibrium constants and reorganization energies were computed with DFT methods that also introduce some assumptions. As further experimental data become available, we will refine the assumptions used to determine the fundamental quantities as well as further test the model itself.

This general multichannel model for describing the kinetics of both homogeneous and electrochemical PCET reactions will have widespread applications. For each system, all relevant reaction channels must be identified. Then, a combination of computational and experimental data can be used to determine the various equilibrium constants and intrinsic rate constants or, in some cases, reasonable ranges for them. Within the framework of this multichannel model, analysis of the dominant forms of the redox species and the dominant channels as a function of pH will provide a deeper mechanistic understanding of PCET reactions.


## ASSOCIATED CONTENT

AUTHOR INFORMATION


## Corresponding Author

This material is based on work solely supported as part of the Center for Hybrid Approaches in Solar Energy to Liquid Fuels, an Energy Innovation Hub funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under award number D E dash S C zero zero two one one seven three. M. C. K. acknowledges support from an Arnold O. Beckman Postdoctoral Fellowship. The authors thank Yogi Surendranath and Jim Mayer for helpful feedback on this work.

in a Tyrosine-Ruthenium-tris-bipyridine Complex: Comparison with Tyrosine Oxidation in Photosystem II. J. Am. Chem. Soc. two thousand, one hundred twenty-two, three nine three two dash three nine three six.

Proton-Coupled Electron Transfer of Tyrosine Oxidation: Buffer Dependence and Parallel Mechanisms. J. Am. Chem. Soc. two thousand seven, one hundred twenty-nine, one five four six two dash one five four six four.

Proton-Coupled Electron Transfer from Tryptophan: A Concerted Mechanism with Water as Proton Acceptor. J. Am. Chem. Soc. two thousand eleven, one hundred thirty-three, eight eight zero six dash eight eight zero nine.

Alkanethiols on Gold: Electroactive Self-Assembled Monolayers. J. Am. Chem. Soc. one thousand nine hundred ninety, one hundred twelve, four three zero one dash four three zero six.

Simple formula for Marcus-Hush-Chidsey kinetics. J. Electroanal. Chem. two thousand fourteen, seven hundred thirty-five, seven seven dash eight three.

Application of Degenerately Doped Metal Oxides in the Study of Photoinduced Interfacial Electron Transfer. J. Phys. Chem. B two thousand fifteen, one hundred nineteen, seven six nine eight dash seven seven one one.