## 1jyv-2024-09-03_20_12_07-polyvalent.pdf

Determination of the Dissociation Constant for Polyvalent Receptors Using ELISA: A Case of M13 Phages Displaying Troponin T-Specific Peptides


## Introduction

Proteins are one of the most fundamental compounds that build living organisms. Various side chains of amino acids (mers in these biopolymers) enable multiple intra- and intermolecular interactions such as the Coulombic and van der Waals forces and aromatic T-T and ion-mediated salt bridges. Interactions between proteins are combinations of several attractive and repulsive forces between chemical groups of amino acids oriented properly to maximize attractive forces and minimize repulsive ones. Protein interactions often result in a conformational change in the tertiary protein structure, which regulates enzyme activity, opening channels or enabling motor activity. Understanding these interactions and their description measurably and comparably is a continuous aim of biochemistry and molecular biology.

The reaction dissociation constant is widely used to describe the strength of interactions between biomolecules. In the biochemical convention, as opposed to in physical chemistry, Ka is presented with a unit (usually mole per liter with an appropriate prefix). Typical values of Ka of immunological complexes are usually in the nanomolar or micromolar range. Generally, Ka is determined using surface plasmon resonance. But there are also other kinetic-based methods which are applied for Ka determination, like bio-layer interferometry, fluorescence correlation microscopy, thermal shift assay, nuclear magnetic resonance, gel chromatography, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy.

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was initially proposed as an alternative to radioimmunosorbent test to examine antigen-antibody interactions. Later, this technique was developed and applied to the study of varied molecular interactions. In general, ELISA exhibits a low limit of detection, especially in its sandwich-like variant. There are a few variants of ELISA; the simplest are direct, indirect, sandwich, and reverse types. Nevertheless, thanks to a wide range of commercially available antibodies and kits, setting up an ELISA experiment is very flexible nowadays. In a typical ELISA, the signal (target-ligand binding) is amplified only by an enzymatic reaction. However, when M13 phages are used, the signal is amplified twice. Every five pIII-displayed ligands may interact with the target, and the binding of one phage particle via single ligand-target interaction provides about two thousand particles of pVIII protein (per virion) ready to be detected by secondary antibodies. In this way, phages provide about ten thousand fold (four orders of magnitude) amplification of the signal, enabling detection of such a low phage amount as about one hundred eight plaque-forming units (pfu, the corresponding molar concentration of virions is about ten to the negative thirteen M) administered into ELISA assay. ELISA may also be applied to study affinity between target and phage-displayed ligand (e.g., peptide).

Indeed, the difference between monovalent binding affinity and multivalent binding avidity is well-known in the literature. However, in the case of phage-ligand complexes, the interactions between phage and ligands were described as one-to-one stoichiometry complexes, while they should be treated as polyvalent receptor-ligand systems, as presented in these studies. Antibodies are not monovalent because IgG and IgA immunoglobulins contain two active sites (antigen-binding sites), whereas IgM contains ten active sites exposed on the pentamer of dimers. Their ability to bind antigens is called avidity as opposed to affinity, which refers to the interactions between one antigen and one antigen-binding site. Omitting polyvalency of the receptor may lead to mistakes in the determination of the dissociation constant. The formation of non-covalent immunological (and immunological-like) complexes between peptides and proteins may be discussed as a reversible reaction, and a qualitative description could be presented based on chemical equilibrium laws. To the best of our knowledge, the mathematical model presented here is the first which enables the calculation of Ka (affinity) from ELISA under the assumption of phage polyvalency. However, the proposed model does not take into account the variability of the valency of M13 phage particles. The number of pIII protein copies per virion depends on several parameters. Empirically determined pIII number varies between studies according to the applied methodology.

As Ka is widely used to express the strength of interaction between proteins, it may be used to describe the strength of target protein binding by phage-derived peptides obtained via phage display. This technique is based on the application of genetically modified bacteriophages (like the Escherichia coli M13 bacteriophage) exposing artificial amino acids sequences on their coat proteins. A mixture of various variants of exposed peptides (called a library) may be screened for variants with desired properties like binding to a target protein. Within our studies, we have obtained a specific peptide as a selective receptor for human cardiac troponin T. We tried to measure the strength of the interaction between phage-exposed peptide and troponin T via ELISA. However, we found a gap in the literature devoted to studying the interactions between ligands and polyvalent receptors, especially discussing their mathematical and physicochemical basis. Troponin T, next to troponin C and troponin I, is part of the troponin complex that plays an essential role in muscle contraction. Even though the troponin complex is present in skeletal and cardiac muscle (but not in smooth muscle), cardiac isoforms of troponin T and troponin I are tissue-specific and may be distinguished from their skeletal isoforms. These two troponins are released into the bloodstream from myocytes for several reasons, e.g., after long-lasting ischemia of the muscle region. Increased concentration of cardiac troponins is one of the fundaments of the fourth universal definition of myocardial infarction approved by several renowned cardiologist associations. Therefore, recognizing cardiac markers (troponin T or troponin I) in a highly efficient and selective manner is important for diagnosing myocardial infarction. Determination of Ka of isolated peptides enables a qualitative description of their affinity against troponin T and, thus, the possibility of application in sensing devices.

This paper proposes a mathematical model of interactions occurring during ELISA between a ligand (troponin T) and a non-monovalent receptor (M13 bacteriophage particle exposing TnT-specific peptides). The provided equations enable the calculation of the dissociation constant from ELISA experiments with the critical impact of polyvalency of a phage, which was not discussed in any publications previously. The applied method may also cover other systems where monovalent molecules interact with multiple active sites of receptor-like natural antibodies. In addition, the interaction between phage-displayed peptides and troponin T molecules was discussed according to their chemical structures.


## Results and Discussion

Mathematical Model. The reaction between troponin T and phage-displayed peptide may be treated as a reversible non-covalent complex formation. According to the induced fitting model, the interaction between the ligand and its binding site on the protein surface requires energy to deform structures and fit them in proper orientation and distance. However, if the interaction is strong enough, the energy released during the process of complex formation is higher than the energy required for complex dissociation. The reaction scheme of a reversible complex formation may be written as equation one.

M13 plus troponin T equals M13 minus (troponin T) one

According to the mass action law, increasing ligand concentration causes a rise in receptor saturation. In the case of a monovalent receptor (complex stoichiometry one to one), the reaction of receptor saturation shown in equation one is sufficient, while polyvalency of the receptor imposes the existence of multiple stages. In order to represent the saturation of n-valent receptor n, equations have to be written as equation two, where i refers to subsequent numbers from one to n. The exact formulas for each stage are given in the Supporting Information.

[M thirteen minus (TnT) semicolon negative one] plus TnT less than or equal to [M thirteen minus (TnT) semicolon] Ri

(two)

In an equilibrium state, formation and dissociation reactions occur at the same rate. Therefore, concentrations of particular reagents remain constant. The ratio of products and substrates concentrations (as approximations of activities) is constant under defined conditions (pH, ion strength, temperature) and is called a reaction constant. For the reaction depicted in equation one, the reaction constant may be written as equation three where Ka refers to the dissociation constant.

Ka equals [M thirteen minus (TnT) one] [M thirteen].[TnT]

(three)

In the case of polyvalent receptor saturation, for each stage an equilibrium state is established and defined in equation four.

Ka i equals [M13 minus (TnT) semicolon negative one].[TnT]' [M13 minus (TnT) semicolon] equals (Ka)i (four)

According to the geometry of phage particle pIII end, if all peptides are properly synthesized and exposed, they should not affect each other. Currently, there is no evidence that any allosteric effect might be present between peptides. Therefore, each stage dissociation constant equals Ka of the isolated TnT-peptide complex defined in equation three. Moreover, the cumulative dissociation constant of particular stage saturation may be expressed as equation four where Ka refers to the dissociation constant of a single complex as equation three.

For every case, the equation for TnT mass conservation may be written for both one to one and one to n stoichiometry, as stated in equation five.

i y i.

k

[TnT] equals co minus Co TnT M thirteen.

[TnT]

one plus Di equals one k

(five)

{

The free TnT equilibrium concentration ([TnT]) was expressed as a difference between total TnT concentration [TnT] and the sum of phage-bound TnT.

After the assumption of varying saturation levels and complex stoichiometry, each complex concentration may be expressed by total phage concentration (c thirteen) and TnT-dependent saturation fractions. This equation is explained in the Supporting Information. In the case of the monovalent receptor, also presented by Friguet, equation five may be written as equation six.

[TnT] equals cJnT minus co M thirteen d one plus [TnT] K, { k i [TnT] y

(six)

ELISA is a widely applied technique in biochemistry that enables the determination of biomolecule concentration. ELISA may be used to determine M thirteen phage concentration using TnT-coated wells and horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-M thirteen antibodies. The signal is generated proportionally to the number of phages bound to surface-immobilized TnT. The presence of soluble TnT causes competition between this form and the surface-immobilized form, which leads to a signal decrease. If the signal measured with a predefined concentration of soluble TnT is called a and the signal of the same concentration of phages in the absence of TnT is a zero, the fraction of occupied active sites (saturation) may be found (equation seven).

(n minus i)

a zero n times one plus

[TnT] Ka

(seven)

An explanation of the derivation of ratios is presented in the Supporting Information. Equation seven is derived in the Supporting Information. This approach (first proposed by Friguet) enables the comparison of a signal from total phage active sites and partially saturated phages. The ratio (equation seven) refers to the ratio of the signal recorded for partially occupied phage's active sites in a mixture of TnT and phage (a) and the signal recorded in the absence of soluble TnT (a zero) which may be interpreted as a signal from all active sites. Experimental determination of the ratio is necessary to calculate the [TnT] Ka ratio, which is crucial for further analysis.

Theoretically, a correlation between the concentration of phage-exposed active sites and a measured signal may be approximated in at least two ways. According to the first

Article

Calculation of the ratio T n T K a is possible analytically for one-to-one and one-to-two stoichiometry, but in the second case, expressions are very complicated, so numerical methods are recommended to solve them. For higher valences, the ratios have to be calculated numerically. K a

T n T over K sub D equals one minus a over a zero over a over a zero. (eight)

For determination of K sub D, calculated analytically or numerically, the T n T over K sub D value may be inserted into equation five or equation six after division by K sub D. Expressing sig T n T over K sub D as a function of the total T n T concentration enables calculation of K sub D for monovalent and non-monovalent phages, respectively, as regression of the slope

One minus a over a zero over a over a zero equals one over K sub D times c zero to the power of T n T minus c zero to the power of M thirteen times one minus a over a zero over K sub D. T n T over K sub D equals one over K sub D times c zero to the power of T n T minus c zero to the power of M thirteen times the sum from l to S of Tr r over K sub D to the power of i over one plus the sum from l equals one to S of T n T over K sub D to the power of i over K sub D. nine ten

During an E L I S A experiment, as proposed by Friguet, a constant concentration of phages is incubated with different concentrations of T n T. Saturation of phages in solution by soluble T n T limits the ability of phages to bind to immobilized T n T, and therefore, increasing concentration of T n T causes a decrease in signal from the phages, in our case, the M thirteen. Theoretically, two options have to be discussed: one a signal (a) is generated for each phage with at least one unoccupied active site and two a signal (a) is generated to the total concentration of unoccupied active sites. A equals f c zero to the power of M thirteen times one minus T n T over K sub D to the power of five over one plus the sum from one to five of T n T over K sub D to the power of i. A equals f c zero to the power of M thirteen times the sum from i equals zero to n of n minus i times T n T over K sub D to the power of i over n times the sum from i equals zero to five of T n T over K sub D to the power of i. eleven twelve

The first variant would be more probable for high T n T surface density significantly higher capability than phages present in solution where phages are mostly bound to the layer. According to the second variant, it is also possible that the recognition and binding process is slow enough to make the reaction kinetically limited. In this case, phages with a higher number of free active sites are more likely to be bound than more saturated ones. Nevertheless, the incubation times during E L I S A and preincubation are comparable, and an equilibrium state can achieve equilibrium in both stages. More accurate assumptions should be proved empirically for each experimental system.


## EXPERIMENTAL SECTION

Bio-Panning. In each bio-panning round, the input and output phases were titrated immediately before or after the experiment. The results of titrations are shown in Table one. The presented mean P left parenthesis O divided by I right parenthesis value for each bio-panning round may be interpreted as the efficiency of phage binding. In chemical nomenclature, P left parenthesis X right parenthesis is defined as negative log left parenthesis X right parenthesis, so a higher P left parenthesis O divided by I right parenthesis means a lower ratio of phage output-input. The P left parenthesis O divided by I right parenthesis value for the first panning round is relatively low. However, usage of more concentrated Tween-twenty (from zero point one to zero point five percent) causes a significant increase in P left parenthesis O divided by I right parenthesis values for the second round (around four) despite a higher phage input. In addition, there is a difference between the second and the third P left parenthesis O divided by I right parenthesis, which may be interpreted as an enrichment of TnT-binders in the phage pool, and it is the main aim of bio-panning via phage display. The increase in phage recovery yield is a widely reported observation by manufacturers and other authors.

Screening of Isolated Variants. The best TnT binders were isolated via ELISA screening (Figure one). As a negative control, wild-type M-thirteen phage was used. Selected clones provide higher signals for TnT-containing wells than for bovine serum albumin (BSA, negative control). It is worth mentioning that both TnT- and BSA-precoated wells were blocked with the same zero point one percent BSA solution, so BSA was present in each well in significant excess. Nevertheless, the presence of TnT causes a noticeable increase of signal, which may suggest a higher affinity of clones to TnT than BSA. Signals from wells that do not contain phages (blank sample) and wild-type phage, which does not expose any peptide, are at least two to five times lower than signals from the analyzed clones. This result confirms the impact of the displayed peptide on phage behavior against TnT and BSA. The significant drawback of this experiment is the inequality of concentrations of different clones because although all solutions were about ten to the power of ten pfu per milliliter, the exact value of the pre-exponential factor differed. Nevertheless, a comparison of the signal of each clone for TnT and BSA reveals a difference.

Analysis of Exposed Peptides on the Selected TnT- Binding Phages. Sequencing of a fragment of gene encoding p-three minor coat protein showed the presence of twelve-amino-acids peptide at the N-terminus in almost all phages. Simultaneous analysis of the sequenced variants (Table two) shows some conservative motifs in all four independent phage pools recovered after three rounds of bio-panning. The peptides DHAQRYGAGHSG (frequency four out of sixteen proper sequences) and QMGFMTSPKHSV (frequency eight out of sixteen proper sequences) are the most abundant. The isoelectric point (calculated using the online tool) of almost all sequenced peptides is above pH seven point four. The recognition steps were performed in PBS, making these peptides positively charged. This result may suggest that these peptides interact with TnT via electrostatic interactions because, in these conditions, the N-terminal region of TnT is negatively charged. In these peptides, predominantly hydrophilic amino acids with hydrogen bond donor groups are present, enabling them to interact with the glutamate-rich regions (which may act as hydrogen bond acceptors). Interaction with the negatively charged helical N-terminus may play a crucial role in recognizing the cardiac TnT isoform due to the tissue-specificity of this region. In conserved central and C- terminal TnT regions, there is a low number of aromatic amino acids (Phe: six, His: four, Trp: three, Tyr: four); however, this fact and the coincidence with the conservation of His residue in most of the peptides may suggest possible sites of interaction via T-T stacking. Additional studies are needed to prove the site where selected peptides may interact with TnT; however, the mentioned conserved positively charged peptides and His residue give hope that the site is located in the cardiac-specific N-terminal region.

In silico modeling of wild-type, p three N-terminal thirty-amino-acid fragment and several peptides fused at that site showed a probable secondary structure of the peptide and terminal region of p three. The native helical fragments at N-terminus for the analyzed A three, C nine, and D eleven clones were quite affected. Nevertheless, undisturbed amplification and titration of these clones exclude the significant impact of additional fragments on bacteria recognition and infection, consistent with the literature reports. N-terminus of cardiac TnT is a long, helical structure exposing polar residues outside the helix, according to in silico simulation of appropriate sequence.


## Article

Phage Concentration Determination Using ELISA.

Non-specific protein immobilization at the liquid/solid interface (of a microtiter plate) is one of the most commonly used methods of preparing wells for ELISA. This immobilized target is recognized by soluble molecules like antibodies or peptide-displaying phages. Stages of ELISA, which assumes specific recognition, may be described using a modified Langmuir-like isotherm. It should be noted that this model cannot be applied for initial non-specific precaution. Since wells are coated with TnT molecules and the number of available target molecules (active sites), they may bind a limited number of phages. Moreover, the number of bound phages limits the amount of bound horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antibodies. The surface density of horseradish peroxidase enzyme (i.e., the amount of horseradish peroxidase immobilized on the liquid/solid interface) is a crucial factor affecting the rate of substrate (three, three', five, five'-tetramethylbenzidine, TMB) oxidation. The reaction rate may be expressed by the rate of the change of absorbance at three hundred seventy nanometers (which is the maximum absorption of the yellow byproduct) under the assumption that the kinetics of the enzymatic reaction is zero order (Michaelis-Menten model and enzyme saturation). In this case, the measured signal is the enzyme activity defined as the slope of the linear time function of absorbance (equation thirteen).

Enzyme activity is proportional to the amount of bound horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antibodies and indirectly to the number of bound phages (equation fourteen). When the reaction is stopped by the addition of sulfuric acid, the enzyme is denatured. As a result, the blue complex dissociates into a yellow product (adsorption maximum at four hundred fifty nanometers) and transparent TMB.

A three hundred seventy nanometers equals a.t plus constant. (thirteen)

a equals f(O horseradish peroxidase) equals f(CM thirteen) (fourteen)

The application of kinetic-based ELISA (also shortened to k-ELISA) was previously described and developed by several authors. The signal recorded in this way has significant advantages such as independence from time-shifting, path length, wells material heterogeneity, and air bubbles. Single-data-point absorbance reading is easier and more high-throughput but generates a higher error.

Figure three presents calibration curves for detecting the A three variant (as an example) and wild-type M thirteen phage. Analysis for the A three clone gave the calibration curve as y equals zero point zero zero one zero x plus zero point zero zero zero six and R squared equals zero point nine nine six one, indicating specific interaction with the studied target, while for the wild-type variant, it was y equals zero point zero zero zero six x plus zero point zero zero one three and R squared equals zero point six three two three. Such a low R squared coefficient may suggest mainly non-specific interaction of the wild-type phage. For the A three, we also calculated sensitivity to be zero point two six four times ten to the nine abs.mL.pfu to the negative one.min to the negative one. The empirically found range of the linearity of the signal enables the calculation of Ka via ELISA. In this range, da/d(CM thirteen) equals the constant value of sensitivity calculated above. The range of the linearity limits and indicates the range of analysis. To maximize the reproducibility of experiments, we decided to work with a phage concentration of about one point zero to ten point zero times ten to the nine pfu per mL, which corresponds to about one point six to sixteen pM.

Determination of Ka via k-ELISA. ELISA (also k-ELISA) can be used to measure the dissociation constant (Ka), which is commonly applied to describe affinity. According to the mathematical model presented above, the Ka value can be calculated via pre-incubation of a receptor with varied concentrations of ligand and subsequent detection of the soluble receptor (phage) via ELISA. This approach was

Article adapted and applied to evaluate the affinity of several phage-derived ligands but without a theoretical analysis and fulfilling fundamental Friguet's assumptions. In these papers, phages were treated as monovalent receptors while they are tri to pentavalent (due to a varied number of p three protein per phage particle). Moreover, the authors applied a wide range of ligand concentrations, high excess compared to the receptor and treated the concentration-signal function as logarithmic, while the discussion above concluded that it is not possible to apply Frigeut's method for almost completely saturated receptors (due to ligand excess).

In our work, analysis was performed for clones: A three, B seven, D eleven, and wild-type M thirteen. These clones were selected for further analysis because they exhibited the highest affinity in screening and could be easily amplified; therefore, the C nine clone was not chosen. The phages' total concentration was about one times ten to the ten pfu per mL (sixteen pM) and was carefully determined using the biological method immediately before analysis. The range of ratios of total TnT and total phage concentration was one to two, one to one, two to one, and four to one. Increasing TnT concentration causes an increase in the saturation of phage-displayed receptors. As a result, a decrease in the ability to bind to immobilized TnT molecules occurs. Experimental data were analyzed according to the presented mathematical model. Calculated values of Ka (from linear slope regression) are listed in Table three.

For all phages, calculated K-a vary for different assumed complex stoichiometries. For the one-to-one stoichiometry, K-a values are the lowest (highest affinity). Then, they rise for bivalent receptors and slightly decrease for pentavalent. The M-thirteen phages usually have three to five copies of the p-three protein. Therefore, the expected valency is between two to five. For every variant, the difference between K-a calculated under the receptor's mono- and bi-valency assumption is higher than the difference between the one-to-two and one-to-five stoichiometries. It suggests that the accurate stoichiometry is closer to one-to-two or one-to-five than to one-to-one. The determined values are very low compared to typical K-a for immunological complexes. However, the presented method requires working under similar concentrations of M-thirteen and T-n-T. The linear range of concentrations obtained for phages using k-E-L-I-S-A was in the picomolar range; therefore, T-n-T concentration also had to be picomolar. A significant disadvantage of this method is that phage titer biologically measured may differ from the real physical concentration of phage particles in solution measured during E-L-I-S-A. In the biological method, phages are only detected if they can infect bacteria and induce dye (x-gal) metabolism to a blue product. In solution, phages may form aggregates that produce false low phage titers from biological assays. For A-three, B-seven, and D-eleven clones, values of K-a are in a similar range which does not correlate with their distribution in the recovered pool. This fact may be explained by the varied rate of phages' amplification in bacteria culture caused by the different proportions of amino acids in peptides and the possible interaction of peptides with bacterial proteins. The same explanation is suggested by the manufacturer of the Ph.D.- twelve kit as justification for advising against the amplification of phage-displayed peptide libraries. For the wild-type M-thirteen, it was impossible to calculate a K-D that may have a physical sense (calculated K-D values were negative), which shows that the model may be applied only for specific interactions.

If a phage is treated as monovalent, the measured K-D does not refer to the thermodynamical strength of single peptide-T-n-T interactions. However, the resultant affinity (strength of single interaction) and valency (number of binding sites per particle) are known in immunology as avidity. Avidities are most significant for I-g-M antibodies that consist of five subunits presenting two antigen-binding domains on each one. As a result, a single I-g-M antibody can theoretically bind ten epitopes, causing one-to-ten antibody-ligand complex stoichiometry. Moreover, bivalent I-g-G antibodies' K-D is affected by non-monovalency in the same manner. Due to avidity's different nature, compared to affinity, a relative dissociation constant may be ten to the power of two to ten to the power of four lower than a single paratope-epitope K-D. However, in several publications, K-D was calculated without correction for non-monovalency of the antigen-binding particle (e.g., phage). One should be aware that the K-D calculated from E-L-I-S-A in these papers is more avidity than affinity.

Several minor modifications of the presented method may be considered to improve the accuracy of K-D determination via E-L-I-S-A. Limitation of non-specific interaction between phage particles and plate/surface-immobilized proteins and revision of phage concentration measurement would be the most significant improvements. However, the proposed mathematical interpretation of interactions between polyvalent receptors sheds new light on the field of affinity determination in phage-peptide systems, similar to the theory presented by the previous authors. The presented model was compared with empirical results that confirm the hypothesis about the mixed valency of phage particles depending on the number of p-three. Studies on peptide-protein complex formation and dissociation in other experimental systems may be discussed in a separate paper to provide comprehensiveness of the field of K-D determination in biochemical sciences.

The described method consumes low amounts of a target protein. Moreover, the phage material is easily amplified in bacteria culture. Owing to this, the presented assay is very suitable and valuable for research aimed at developing new high-affinity protein-specific receptors. The identified T-n-T-specific peptides might also find applications in research, especially connected with heart and cardiovascular diseases. Moreover, we anticipate that the selected T-n-T binding phages or peptides can be used to optimize a sensing layer toward implementing this concept for detecting the markers of cardiovascular diseases and transferring them into feasible applications in clinical diagnostics. The applied method may also cover other systems where monovalent molecules interact with multiple active sites of the receptor-like natural antibodies.


## Methods

Proteins (in the form of lyophilized powder): troponin T from the human heart, B-S-A and myoglobin from the equine heart (M-b) were purchased from Sigma, U-S-A, dissolved in one hundred


## Article

millimolar phosphate-buffered saline P-H equals seven point four (P-B-S) also bought from Sigma, U-S-A and stored at negative twenty degrees Celsius. Ph.D.-twelve Phage Display Peptide Library and E. coli E-R-two-seven-three-eight (F prime P-R-O A plus B plus L-A-C I-Q) A lacZ M-fifteen zzf : T-n ten (TetR)/fhuA-two glnV A(lac-proA-B) thi-one A(hsdS-mcrB)-five. [rk- mk- McrB-C-]) were bought from New England Biolabs (N-E-B, U-S-A). Bacteria were grown in lysogeny broth (L-B) bought from Roth, Germany, and plates were prepared by solidification of L-B with one point five percent agar (Roth, Germany). Supplements: tetracycline (LabEmpire, Poland) to a final concentration of five micrograms per milliliter, I-P-T-G (A and A Biotechnology, Poland) to one microgram per milliliter, and x-gal (A and A Biotechnology, Poland) zero point eight micrograms per milliliter were added to sterile L-B agar medium after autoclaving. P-B-S-T in an appropriate concentration was obtained by directly dissolving Tween-twenty (Sigma-Aldrich, U-S-A) in P-B-S. Dynabeads M-two-seventy Epoxy was bought from Invitrogen/Thermo Fischer Scientific (U-S-A). Isolation of phage D-N-A was performed as stated in ref, and sequencing of the phage genome was performed by Genomed (Poland) using -nine-six-P-three primer (N-E-B). Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-M-thirteen-p-eight monoclonal antibody was bought from Lab-Jot (N-E-B, U-S-A) and used in one to five thousand dilution, while three, three-prime, five, five-prime-tetramethylbenzidine (T-M-B, H-R-P enzyme substrate) was delivered by Thermo Fisher Scientific (U-S-A) and used without pretreatment.

General Bacteria and Phage Protocols and Biopanning. Bacteria strains were stored in fifty percent glycerol solution at negative eighty degrees Celsius. Bacteria were sown on LB plates containing five micrograms per milliliter of tetracycline and inoculated into fresh LB at least one day before experiments.

Phages were suspended in PBS solutions and stored at four degrees Celsius. Titration was performed using the protocol described by Łos et al. Briefly, immediately before usage two hundred microliters of bacteria culture was suspended in warm agar and split onto bottom agar containing x-gal and IPTG. Then, two point five microliters of subsequent ten-fold dilutions of the phage sample were dripped onto the bacteria lawn. Prepared plates were incubated overnight at thirty-seven degrees Celsius. Phage titer was calculated by multiplying the number of single dots by the dilution factor and the constant coefficient for volume correction and depicted in plaque-forming units per milliliter (pfu per mL). Amplification and purification of phages were performed according to well-established protocols with slight modifications.

Plate panning was performed regarding the general concept presented by Barbas et al. with some modifications. Polystyrene plates were precoated with TnT and incubated overnight (eighteen to twenty-four hours) in one hundred microliters of twenty micrograms per milliliter TnT solution in PBS at four degrees Celsius. Then, the wells were emptied and filled with one hundred microliters of zero point one percent BSA solution (in PBS) and incubated for two hours in the fridge. Later, they were washed four times with PBST zero point one percent (in the first panning round) and zero point five percent in the next two. For the first panning round, one hundred microliters of one hundred times diluted Ph.D.- twelve Phage Display Peptide Library was used; however, it was tried immediately before use, showing an accurate phage concentration of eighty-four times ten to the power of eight. After one hour of incubation on the shaker at room temperature, wells were washed four times using zero point one percent (in the first round) or zero point five percent (in further rounds) PBST. After washing, one hundred microliters of elution buffer (zero point two M glycine-HCl, pH two point two) was added, and after ten minutes it was collected. Ten microliters was used to titrate the output phase, while ninety microliters was directly transferred into the bacteria culture for amplification. Lysates (products of amplification and purification of phages) were titered and used for subsequent pannings or single clone isolation. This isolation was performed via whole-plate titration described by Łos et al., although the bottom agar contains x-gal/IPTG instead of antibiotics. Single clones (only blue dots) were picked up and placed in a standard amplification mixture.

Peptide Structure Prediction and Interaction Modeling. Three-dimensional structures of peptides exposed on the N-terminus of pIII protein were generated using PEP-FOLD three-a part of the online Mobyle system generously provided by Institute Pasteur and Paris Diderot University. Peptides were analyzed with thirty N-terminal amino acids of pIII after cleavage of the signal sequence (fragment: twelve GGGAETVESCLAKPHTENSFTNVWKDDKTL- DRY thirty-five, sixty-one) in order to maximize mimicking of the local environment of the peptide. Human cardiac TnT N-terminal fragment two to fifty (SDIEEVVEEYEEEEQEEAAVEEEEDWREDEDEQEEAAEEDAEAEAETEE forty-five) without cleavaged Met was generated in the same manner.

Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay. ELISAs were performed in ninety-six-well polystyrene plates (Thermo Scientific, USA). Wells were precoated with the desired protein sixteen to twenty hours incubation of the protein suspension in PBS at four degrees Celsius. assays, one to five thousand dilution of HRP-antiM13pVIII monoclonal antibody conjugate was used. Signals were recorded using Synergy HTX Multi-Mode Reader by BioTek.

In the initial screening, plates were precoated with troponin T or BSA (negative control) by incubating one hundred microliters of one microgram per milliliter appropriate protein solution. Then plates were blocked with zero point one percent BSA for two hours at four degrees Celsius and washed four times with zero point one percent PBST. Every isolated phage clone solution (phages concentration ten to the power of ten pfu per mL, one hundred microliters) was incubated with TnT and BSA for one hour at three hundred fifty RPM at room temperature. Then wells were washed four times using zero point one percent PBST, one hundred microliters of HRP-antibody conjugate was added, and plates were incubated as previously. After one hour, plates were washed as before, and fifty microliters of TMB was added. After five minutes, the reaction was stopped by adding fifty microliters of two M sulfuric acid. Absorbance at four hundred fifty nanometers was read using a Synergy HTX Multi-Mode Reader (BioTek) plate reader.

The application of k-ELISA for measuring phage concentration was performed by precoating wells using zero point two five microgram per milliliter TnT (or BSA in the negative control). The next steps regarding washing were performed in the same way as described above, despite zero point zero one percent myoglobin being applied for blocking phages concentrations (range: zero point two times ten to the power of nine, four times ten to the power of nine, six times ten to the power of five, eight times ten to the power of nine pfu per mL) and HRP-conjugated antibody solutions were added in amounts of fifty microliters. Myoglobin was chosen as a blocking agent due to its small size (approximately seventeen kDa), globular shape, and low price. BSA as a widely used blocking agent was avoided because it was present in all panning rounds, and peptides were suspected of exhibiting affinity to BSA. The signal was recorded by reading absorbance at three hundred seventy nm in a kinetic experiment every seventy seconds for ten minutes.

The dissociation constant was calculated using k-ELISA, according to the procedure first described by Friguet. Phages P equals ten to the power of ten pfu per milliliter corresponding to about sixteen pico M were preincubated with different concentrations of TnT from zero to four nanograms per milliliter which corresponds to one hundred and eight pico M. Next, mixtures were transferred into wells precoated with zero point two five micrograms per milliliter TnT or BSA. Further steps were performed in the same manner as for phage concentration measuring experiments.


## AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Authors


## Authors

Author Contributions

The manuscript was written through the contributions of all authors. All authors have approved the final version of the manuscript.