## Hydrocarbon Hydroxylation by Methane Monooxygenase

Radical Clock Substrate Probes and Kinetic Isotope Effect Studies of the Hydroxylation of Hydrocarbons by Methane Monooxygenase

Abstract: Four mechanistic probes, trans-2-phenylmethylcyclopropane (one), two,two-diphenylmethylcyclopropane (two), trans-one,two- dimethylcyclopropane (three), and bicyclo[2.1.0]pentane (four), were used as substrates to investigate the possible formation of radical intermediates in the catalytic cycle of the methane monooxygenase system from Methylococcus capsulatus (Bath) in reactions conducted at forty-five degrees Celsius. Hydroxylation of one gave two products in equal amounts, the alcohol trans-(two-phenylcyclopropyl)methanol (one A) and the phenol trans-two-(para-hydroxyphenyl)methylcyclopropane (one C). The two different products are attributed to discrimination by the enzyme of the two enantiomers of probe one, one of which leads to hydroxylation of the aromatic ring and the other to formation of the primary alcohol. The absence of ring-opened product, one-phenylbut-three-en-one-ol (one B), is noteworthy and suggests that the hydroxylation reaction may not proceed through formation of the cyclopropylcarbinyl radical or cation. The former species rearranges to the three-butenyl radical with a rate constant of four times ten to the power of eleven per second at forty-five degrees Celsius, which would require a rebound rate constant for MMO from M. capsulatus (Bath) in excess of ten to the power of thirteen per second. The possibility of a stereoelectronic barrier to ring opening in the active site of the enzyme is addressed through a semiquantitative analysis of the rate constant with Marcus theory. Studies with the other radical clock probes support the notion that a significant component of the hydroxylation reaction pathway does not proceed through a radical intermediate. Compound two, the cyclopropylcarbinyl radical of which has a ring-opening rate constant of five times ten to the power of eleven per second, yields exclusively (two,two-diphenylcyclopropyl)methanol (two A); three, which has a rate constant of four point four times ten to the power of eight per second, affords only trans-(two-methylcyclopropyl)methanol (three A); and four, which has a rate constant of three times ten to the power of nine per second, gives mainly a mixture of endo- and exo-two-hydroxybicyclo[2.1.0]pentane (four A and four B). Kinetic isotope effect experiments were also carried out with derivatives of one, mono-, di-, and trideuterated at the methyl position. No intermolecular isotope effect, assessed by comparing the rate of conversion of the undeuterated and trideuterated probes, was observed, a result consistent with carbon-hydrogen bond breaking not being involved in the rate-determining step of the enzymatic reaction. Intramolecular kinetic isotope effects of K sub H over K sub D equals five point one five and five point zero three were obtained from studies of the mono- and dideuterated probes, respectively, which indicates that the hydroxylation reaction involves a substantial carbon-hydrogen bond stretching component. The MMO hydroxylase from Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b gave both unrearranged and a small amount, three to five percent, of rearranged products with one, the ratio of which corresponds to a rebound rate constant of six to nine times ten to the power of twelve per second at thirty degrees Celsius. These results are discussed in terms of several possible detailed mechanisms for the MMO hydroxylase reaction.


## Introduction

Methane monooxygenase is a protein system employed by methanotrophic bacteria to oxidize methane to methanol, a process that provides these organisms with their sole source of carbon and energy, as shown in the equation. The soluble methane monooxygenases from Methy-

C H sub four plus O sub two plus N A D H plus H plus yields C H sub three O H plus H sub two O plus N A D plus.

lococcus capsulatus (Bath) and Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b, two of the better studied systems, comprise three proteins. Included are a hydroxylase enzyme that binds substrate and dioxygen, a reductase that contains Fe two S two and FAD moieties and accepts electrons from NADH, and a coupling protein that regulates electron transfer between the reductase and the hydroxylase and also modulates the substrate specificity and redox potentials of the latter. Recently, much attention has been focused on the hydroxylase enzyme, which is capable of hydroxylating a wide variety of substrates, in addition to methane. EXAFS, EPR, Mössbauer, ENDOR, and other physical studies have shown that the active site in this enzyme contains a dinuclear non-heme iron center in which the metals are probably each coordinated to a histidine and several carboxylate ligands and linked to one another by a monodentate oxygen atom, either from water, hydroxide, or monodentate carboxylate, as well as by a bidentate carboxylate bridge. The center resembles that in the crystallographically characterized R-two protein of ribonucleotide reductase.

to form a hydrocarbon radical that recombines with the coordinated hydroxyl radical before dissociating from the active site.

The catalytic mechanism of the MMO hydroxylase has frequently been compared to that of its widely studied heme analogue, cytochrome P-four hundred fifty. In P-four hundred fifty-catalyzed hydroxylations, it is postulated that a high-valent iron oxo, or ferryl, moiety is generated which abstracts a hydrogen atom from the substrate

Especially important in establishing the presence of radical intermediates in this mechanism were studies with substrate probes that, following hydrogen atom abstraction to form a radical, isomerize to form, ultimately, a rearranged alcohol product. This process is illustrated for a specific probe, trans-two-phenylmethylcyclopropane (one), in Scheme One. Attempts to employ this methodology in studies of the hydroxylation of one,one-dimethylcyclopropane with the MMO hydroxylase from M. trichosporium OB3b were consistent with radical formation, although cationic intermediates were also invoked. Other experimental evidence for the involvement of radical intermediates in the hydroxylation chemistry of MMO from the same organism has been reported.

In the present article we describe our investigations of the MMO hydroxylase from both organisms in which four substrate probes, one through four, illustrated in Chart I, have been used to address the question of radical intermediates and other aspects of the hydroxylation mechanism. Specifically, reactions with trans-one, two-dimethylcyclopropane (three) and bicyclo[two point one point zero]pentane (four), both of which were used to study the rate constants for rebound with cytochrome P-four-fifty, and with two additional, much faster, radical clock substrates, trans-two-phenylmethylcyclopropane (one) and two, two-diphenylmethylcyclopropane (two), were carried out to determine whether substrate radicals are produced during hydroxylation. If, for example, hydrogen atom abstraction from probe one at the methyl position were to occur, the resulting cyclopropylcarbinyl radical (U', Scheme I) either would be trapped before ring opening to give trans-(two-phenylcyclopropyl)methanol (one a) or would ring open to the one-phenylbut-three-enyl radical (R°). Subsequent trapping of radical R' would afford one-phenylbut-three-en-one-ol (one b). Substrate one has been employed previously as a hypersensitive radical probe in oxidations by resting cells and crude enzyme preparations of Pseudomonas oleovorans monooxygenase. In that work, the only oxidation product detected was the ring-opened alcohol, leading to the conclusion that radical intermediates had been formed and that the oxygen rebound step had a rate constant of less than four times ten to the ninth per second.


## Experimental Section

Isolation and Purification of Proteins. M capsulatus (Bath) was grown as reported previously. The hydroxylase protein was purified and assayed following the described procedure, except that Q Sepharose was substituted for DEAE Sepharose in the initial ion exchange chromatography step. The coupling protein (formerly designated protein B) was prepared from an Escherichia coli strain harboring a plasmid containing this gene from M capsulatus (Bath) and then purified according to published procedures. The reductase was purified as described except that an HPLC TSKG-three-thousandSWG column was employed as a final purification step. Specific activities with propylene were measured at two hundred to two hundred fifty, eight thousand to eight thousand five hundred, and four thousand to four thousand two hundred milliunits per mg for the hydroxylase, coupling protein, and reductase, respectively.

Growth of M trichosporium OBthreeb and purification of its hydroxylase were carried out as reported. Its specific activity for conversion of propylene to propylene oxide was monitored with the use of coupling protein and reductase from M capsulatus (Bath), for which cross-reactivity with the M trichosporium OBthreeb hydroxylase has been reported previously. The measured activity was one hundred eighty milliunits per mg of protein, a value considerably less than expected, possibly due to the use of coupling protein and reductase from a different organism. Reactions of fifteen micromolar solutions of the M trichosporium OBthreeb hydroxylase with ten millimolar hydrogen peroxide produced zero point one nine millimolar propylene oxide in a three-minute reaction, however, which compares favorably with literature reports that forty-four micromolar hydroxylase and ten millimolar HtwoOtwo yielded approximately zero point four millimolar propylene oxide in the same time period. The measured iron content, two point two mol of iron per mol of hydroxylase, was less than that found by others, four point three mol of iron per mol of protein, for which we have no obvious explanation.

Synthesis and Characterization of Substrates and Products. The substrate trans-two-phenylmethylcyclopropane (one) was prepared as previously reported by reducing commercially available trans-two-phenylcyclopropanecarboxylic acid or its ethyl ester to alcohol one a, trans-(two-phenylcyclopropyl) methanol, with lithium aluminum hydride, converting the alcohol to the mesylate, and reducing the mesylate with lithium triethylborohydride. As an alternative, conversion of alcohol one a to the corresponding chloride by treatment with triphenylphosphine and carbon tetrachloride followed by reduction with lithium aluminum hydride gave hydrocarbon one and ring-opened product four-phenylbut-one-ene; treatment of the mixture with meta-chloroperoxybenzoic acid to epoxidize the alkene byproduct, followed by silica gel chromatography, gave pure one. Deuterated analogues of one were prepared by the mesylate route with lithium aluminum deuteride as the source of deuterium. Their NMR and mass spectra were consistent with the expected amount of deuterium incorporation for each analogue.

The substrate two, two-diphenylmethylcyclopropane (two) was prepared by a sequence similar to that described above for one. Reaction of ethyl diazoacetate in the presence of copper sulfate with one, one-diphenylethene gave ethyl two, two-diphenylcyclopropanecarboxylate, which was reduced with lithium aluminum hydride to (two, two-diphenylcyclopropyl)methanol (two a). Conversion of two a to the mesylate followed by lithium triethylborohydride reduction gave two.

Authentic samples of the products obtained by the MMO-catalyzed oxidation of substrates one and two were prepared in the following manner. trans-(two-Phenylcyclopropyl)methanol (one a) and its dideuterated analogue were obtained from the synthesis of one, and alcohol two a was available in the preparation of two, as indicated above. Monodeuterated one a was prepared by LiAID four reduction of trans-(two-phenylcyclopropyl)methanal which, in turn, was obtained from the acid by sequential treatment with H three BSMe two and pyridinium chlorochromate. One-Phenylbut-three-en-one-ol (one b) and one,one-diphenylbut-three-en-one-ol (two b) were prepared by reactions of allylmagnesium chloride with benzaldehyde and benzophenone, respectively.

An authentic sample of trans-two-(P-hydroxyphenyl)methylcyclopropane (one c) was prepared by the following sequence. Reaction of P-vinylanisole with ethyl diazoacetate gave a mixture of ethyl cis- and trans-two-(P-methoxyphenyl)cyclopropanecarboxylates, which was separated by column chromatography and crystallization. The trans isomer, identified


## Hydrocarbon Hydroxylation by Methane Monooxygenase

by NMR spectroscopy, was reduced with LiAlH four, and the resulting alcohol was converted to its mesylate, which was then reduced with LiEt three BH. The resulting trans-two-(P-methoxyphenyl)methylcyclopropane was demethylated with NaSEt in DMF to give the desired product, which was purified by preparative GC on a Carbowax twenty M column. Authentic samples of the possible aromatic hydroxylated products from two were not prepared; no components consistent with these products were observed by GC mass spectral analysis of the oxidation mixtures.

Full details of the above synthetic procedures are provided as suptrans-one, two-Dimethylcyclopropane left three, trans-left two-methylcyclopropyl right obtained from Wiley Organics. Bicyclo[two.one.zero]pentane four was synthesized according to a literature method.

Enzymatic Reactions. Reactions with MMO from M. capsulatus (Bath) were carried out at forty-five degrees Celsius with the reconstituted enzyme system in the following manner. Solutions were prepared that contained one point two milligrams (ten micro molar) of hydroxylase, zero point two milligrams (twenty-four micro molar) of coupling protein, and zero point four milligrams (twenty micro molar) of reductase, all in twenty-five millimolar MOPS, pH seven point zero, in a final volume of zero point five milliliters. A zero point five-microliter portion of substrate was then added by means of a microsyringe to achieve a maximum concentration of approximately eight millimolar, most of the substrates not being completely soluble prior to conversion to products. The reaction mixture was placed in a ten-milliliter glass vial and sealed with a Suba-Seal septum. After addition of a twenty-five-microliter portion of a zero point one molar stock solution of ethanol-free NADH to initiate the hydroxylation reaction, the vial was placed in a shaker-incubator maintained at forty-five degrees Celsius. Control reactions were performed in an identical manner except that no NADH was added. Reactions were allowed to proceed for fifteen minutes, a time sufficient to afford at least thirty mol of product per mol of enzyme in those cases where authentic standards were available.

Studies with the hydroxylase from M. trichosporium OB three b and substrate one were carried out at thirty degrees Celsius in one of two ways. Coupling protein and reductase from M. capsulatus (Bath) were incubated with the hydroxylase in the presence of NADH. The protein and NADH concentrations were the same as described in the preceding paragraph. Alternatively, reactions were performed by using ten millimolar hydrogen peroxide and M. trichosporium OB three b hydroxylase only, a known shunt for this enzyme. Substrate was added to the reaction mixture, which was then incubated as described above. Again, at least thirty turnovers were completed before the reaction was terminated.

Instrumentation. Products from enzyme oxidations were analyzed with a Hewlett-Packard (HP) Model five thousand eight hundred ninety gas chromatograph either equipped with an FID detector or interfaced to an HP Model five thousand nine hundred seventy-one A mass spectrometer (EI, seventy electron volts). For GC and GC/MS analysis, either a cross-linked methyl silicon (HP) capillary column was employed, depending on which column gave better resolution of the reaction components. The column dimensions were ten meters by zero point five millimeters by one point zero micrometers for GC analysis and twenty-five meters by zero point two millimeters by zero point three three micrometers for GC/MS analysis. Slightly different instrumental conditions were used to analyze the different reactions, as indicated in Table SI (supplementary material).

Product Identification and Quantitation. Products were isolated by thorough extraction of the reaction mixture with diethyl ether or ethyl acetate. The septum of the reaction vial was removed, five milliliters of extracting solvent was added, and the septum was immediately replaced. The mixture was incubated for at least ten minutes, the organic layer was then removed, and the entire procedure was repeated twice. The organic layers were combined, dried over anhydrous potassium carbonate, and then concentrated by slow evaporation under argon to a volume of approximately one hundred microliters. After the addition of an appropriate internal standard, a zero point two to zero point five microliter sample of concentrated extract was injected into the gas chromatograph. The retention times and mass spectra of the products were compared to those of authentic standards.

Components of the hydroxylation reaction mixture for one through three were quantified by constructing standard curves in the following manner. Solutions containing known concentrations of a given component and a constant amount of an internal standard dissolved in ethyl acetate or diethyl ether were injected into the GC. The ratio of the peak area corresponding to the component with that of the standard was then plotted against the concentration of added component in the sample. A linear plot was obtained and subsequently used as a calibration curve to determine the concentration of the component in extracts obtained from reactions with the enzyme. Plots were constructed in this manner for alcohols one a through three a, rearranged alcohols one b through three b, and three c, two-(P-hydroxyphenyl)methylcyclopropane (one c), and substrates one through three. Since no one b was detected in reactions of MMO from M. capsulatus (Bath) with one infra), mass balance determinations were made to ensure that the amount of unreacted substrate and products corresponded to the amount of substrate added to the reaction. In addition, reactions containing zero point eight millimolar one B as well as the usual quantity (eight millimolar) of one were carried out to determine if the latter would survive the hydroxylation conditions and/or compete with one for the enzyme. Mock experiments were carried out without addition of NADH, and the substrate was recovered following the usual extraction and concentration procedures.

Isotope Effect Studies. Reactions with MMO from M. capsulatus (Bath) were investigated with one and its mono-, di-, and trideuterated derivatives at the methyl position. An intramolecular isotope effect was investigated through studies of the mono- and dideuterated derivatives. The product alcohol one A from reactions with each substrate was analyzed by GC/MS. The isotope effect was then calculated by comparison of the intensities, after statistical corrections, at M by Z one four eight and one four nine for alcohols arising from the monodeuterated substrate and at M by Z one four nine and one five zero for alcohols derived from the dideuterated substrate.

Intermolecular isotope effects were evaluated by comparison of the rate of formation of one A in MMO-catalyzed reactions with the undeuterated and the trideuterated derivatives. The experiment was performed in two ways, as a competitive reaction and as separate reactions with each substrate. Competition experiments were performed with equal amounts (zero point five microliters) of both derivatives present in the reaction vial. The mass spectral intensity at M by Z one four eight, representing reaction of the undeuterated substrate, was divided by the intensity at M by Z one five zero, representing reaction with the trideuterated substrate, and the ratio was taken as the intermolecular isotope effect. In separate reactions with the two derivatives, two-(P-hydroxyphenyl)methylcyclopropane (one C), a product of the enzymatic reaction (vide infra), was used as an internal standard for the purpose of quantitation. The amount of one A relative to one C was calculated for each derivative. The ratio of alcohol to phenol for the undeuterated derivative was divided by the same ratio for the trideuterated derivative to provide the intermolecular isotope effect.


## Results

The hydroxylation of one yielded two products as revealed by both GC and GC/MS analysis. They were identified as alcohol one A and two-(P-hydroxyphenyl)methylcyclopropane (one C) by comparison of their retention times and mass spectra with those of authentic standards. Quantitation of the peaks revealed that the two products are formed in approximately equal concentrations and at equal rates over a twenty-minute reaction period (Figure S1, supplementary material). To ensure that all added material was accounted for in the analysis, mass balance studies were carried out. The amount of material recovered in control reactions run in the absence of reductant corresponded to eighty-four point four divided by zero point six percent of the substrate initially added, the remainder apparently being lost through the various extraction manipulations. When NADH was present to initiate and sustain enzyme turnover, eighty-five point zero plus or minus zero point five percent of the material added was recovered, five point zero plus or minus zero point two percent of which was one A, and five point one plus or minus zero point one percent, one C. No rearranged alcohol one B was detected. The possibility that one B formed but was unstable under the hydroxylation conditions was investigated through analysis of a reaction containing eight millimolar one and zero point eight millimolar one B. In the presence of NADH, seventy-eight point six plus or minus one point three percent of one B was recovered, compared to seventy-eight point two plus or minus one point zero percent in control reactions without NADH. This result indicates that one B is unaffected during the hydroxylation reaction. The yields of one A and one C remained unchanged.

Hydroxylation studies of the mono- and dideuterated derivatives of substrate one gave values for K H over K P of five point one five plus or minus zero point three eight and five point zero three plus or minus zero point four two, respectively, for the intramolecular isotope effect. The intermolecular isotope effect was determined by comparing results for one with those for its trideuterated derivative. A value of one point one eight plus or minus zero point one five was obtained for reactions that were performed separately, whereas competitive reactions performed with both derivatives present in the reaction mixture yielded a value of zero point eight nine plus or minus zero point one zero (see Experimental Section). In the competition study, the ratio of phenols (one C-D zero to one C-D three) was one point one.

GC analysis of hydroxylation reactions with two revealed only a single product, which was identified by comparison to an authentic standard as the alcohol two a. No peaks that might arise from rearranged alcohol two b or aromatic hydroxylation products were detected. A plot showing the rate of product formation is given in Figure S two.

Analysis of the extracts from reactions with trans one, two dimethylcyclopropane three revealed only one product, the concentration of which increased linearly with time over a ten-minute period. It was identified as the unrearranged alcohol, trans two-methylcyclopropyl methanol three a, through comparison of its GC retention time with that of an authentic standard. No four penten two ol three b or two methylbut three en one ol three c was detected.

The substrate bicyclo two point one point zero pentane four afforded three products upon reaction with MMO, each of which had its parent ion at m over z eighty-four as determined by GC MS analysis. No authentic standards were available for the expected products, but one product could be positively identified as endo two hydroxy bicyclo two point one point zero pentane four a by comparison of its mass spectrum with one published previously. The second major peak in the gas chromatogram was assigned as exo two hydroxybicyclo two point one point zero pentane four b. Unfortunately no mass spectral data for this compound were available for comparison. The peak had approximately the same intensity, about eighty-five percent, in the total-ion chromatogram of the reaction extracts as that of four a. Its mass spectrum differed from those of four a and three cyclopenten one ol four c, for which mass spectral data are also available. Hydroxylation of four by cytochrome P four fifty yielded only four a and four c. The failure of this enzyme to afford four b was attributed to constraints at the active site. It may be that the active site of MMO is less discriminating, which could account for the formation of both four a and four b.

The third product from reactions with four was present in only trace amounts and was assigned as three cyclopenten one ol four c. It has been reported previously that four a undergoes thermal rearrangement to four c. In particular, when four a isolated from the hydroxylation of four by MMO was injected into the GC MS, the ratio of four c to four a was found to be about one to thirty. Compound four b is expected to behave similarly. The intensity of the peak corresponding to four c was also found to increase relative to those for four a and four b when the reactions were run at forty-five degrees celsius for longer times. Increasing the injector and oven temperatures of the gas chromatograph produced a similar effect. The ratio of four c to four a was one to forty, or including both four a and four b, one to eighty, and increased with longer


## Hydrocarbon Hydroxylation by Methane Monooxygenase

incubation times at forty-five degrees celsius to about one to fifteen. It is therefore likely that a significant amount, if not all, of four c obtained in these experiments is due to thermal rearrangement of four a and four b. The amount of four c present in the enzymatic reactions is small enough that its presence could be solely the result of thermal rearrangement of four a and four b.

Experiments were also carried out with one and the hydroxylase from M. trichosporium OB three b. In contrast to reactions with MMO from M. capsulatus Bath, three products were observed. They were identified as unrearranged alcohol one a, two para hydroxy phenyl methylcyclopropane one c, and rearranged product one b. The ratio of unrearranged to rearranged alcohol was found to be thirty-two to one in reactions performed with coupling protein and reductase from M. capsulatus Bath and twenty-two to one for reactions using hydrogen peroxide.


## Discussion

Analysis of Products Formed. In this work, four hydrocarbon substrates were employed as mechanistic probes in oxidations catalyzed by the MMO of M. capsulatus Bath. In each case, if a hydrogen atom were abstracted from the probe, the resulting radical could either rebound to form the unrearranged product or ring open to afford the rearranged product. In no case was rearrangement observed. For trans one, two dimethylcyclopropane three only a single product formed, corresponding to the unrearranged alcohol three a, e q two. No allylic alcohol was detected

"C H two three b, e q three, implying that no more than one percent of this product formed during the hydroxylation reaction. From the known rate constant for rearrangement of the corresponding cyclopropylcarbinyl radical and assuming that this rate constant is the same for substrate free in solution and bound to the enzyme, we estimate that the rebound rate constant of a radical intermediate would have to be at least four times ten to the power of ten per second at forty-five degrees celsius. A similar analysis of the results for reactions with compounds four, one, and two raises the rebound rate constant limits to three times ten to the power of eleven, four times ten to the power of thirteen, and one times ten to the power of thirteen per second, respectively. The latter two values exceed the rate constant of decomposition of a transition state and are incompatible with a discrete radical intermediate.

The rate constants for ring opening of radicals derived from one and two have been measured indirectly by competition against P H Se H trapping. At room temperature, the ring

""I C H

openings have rate constants of three times ten to the power of eleven per second and five times ten to the power of eleven per second, respectively, which places these reactions among the fastest reported radical rearrangements involving a bond-breaking step. With such a velocity, detectable amounts of ring-opened products are expected to be produced from these radicals even when the fastest possible trapping reactions compete. Therefore, the absence of ring-opened alcohols one b and two b suggests that probes one and two were converted directly to alcohols one a and two a without formation of radicals. On the other hand, a small amount of rearranged product one b was observed in the studies of MMO from M. tri chosporium OB three b. From the ratio of unrearranged to rearranged alcohol the rate constant for rebound was calculated to be six to ten times ten to the power of twelve per second. The observed differences in the results for MMO from the two different sources will be discussed later.

In the case of the chiral substrate probe one, oxidation occurred not only at the methyl group but also at the phenyl ring to form two para hydroxyphenyl methylcyclopropane one c. The fact that one a and one c are produced in equal quantities over the course of the reaction suggested that the two products might arise from different enantiomers of the probe. Preliminary studies with partially resolved one tend to confirm this possibility, but more data are required for the hydroxylation of both pure enantiomers before a definitive statement can be made.

Deuterium Isotope Effects. Studies of the reaction of deuterated derivatives of one with mono-oxygenase from methylosinus capsulatus Bath failed to reveal any intermolecular isotope effect. Both individual and competitive reactions with the undeuterated and trideuterated derivatives yielded values of K sub H over K sub D observed of approximately one point zero and in good agreement with one another, considering the error limits. It is important to note that the ratio of undeuterated and trideuterated phenols observed in the competition experiment was one point one. When combined with the ratio of zero point eight nine for the undeuterated and dideuterated alcohols one a, this result shows that the overall rates of oxidation of the undeuterated and trideuterated substrates were equal. Thus, there was essentially no kinetic discrimination for substrates by the enzyme, and this behavior suggests that carbon-hydrogen bond breaking is not rate-limiting in the overall hydroxylation reaction. Such a result is consistent with some but not all previous studies of mono-oxygenase hydroxylation reactions using deuterated substrates.

Given that the overall oxidation rates of one-do and one-d three were the same, the product distributions should be considered in more detail. If oxidation of each of the enantiomers of substrate one could have occurred at either the methyl group or the aromatic ring, and if rotation can occur in the active site, then a kinetic isotope effect should have been observed in the oxidations of the undeuterated and trideuterated probes, with substantially more phenol product being formed in the latter case. This result is clearly predicted from the intramolecular kinetic isotope effects that were found, vide infra. That such was not the case reinforces our speculation that products one a and one c arise mainly from different enantiomers of the probe.

In contrast to the lack of an intermolecular isotope effect, a significant intramolecular isotope effect of approximately five point one statistically corrected was observed in oxidations of both the mono- and dideuterated probes one. In each case, the observed isotope effects are equal to the primary kinetic isotope effects K sub H over K sub D divided by a secondary kinetic isotope effect that results from the fact that in both cases an additional deuterium atom remains bound after oxidation of a carbon-hydrogen bond. The data do not permit an extraction of the secondary kinetic isotope effect, but it is clear that the K sub H over K sub D observed ratio signals a substantial carbon-hydrogen bond stretching component in the transition state of the rate-limiting step in the oxidation reaction. The value of K sub H over K sub D observed equals five point one may be compared with the intramolecular isotope effect of seven point eight observed in the oxidation of probe one with pseudomonas oleovorans mono-oxygenase. Recently, a value of K sub H over K sub D equals four point two plus or minus zero point two was reported for mono-oxygenase from methylosinus trichosporium O B three b with the substrates S and R carbon one dash two H carbon one dash three H ethane, in good agreement with the present results. Cytochrome P- four fifty dependent enzymes oxidize a number of substrates with intramolecular isotope effects of seven to fourteen. Intramolecular isotope effects for hydrogen atom abstractions by the reactive tert-butoxy radical studied at temperatures in the vicinity of twenty-five degrees Celsius range from one point two to five point four, and isotope effects for hydrogen abstractions by less reactive peroxy radicals are greater.

Mechanistic Considerations: Formation of the Dioxygen-Activated Diiron Center. Scheme two outlines a reasonable working hypothesis for the catalytic mechanism of mono-oxygenase. Substrate first binds to the complete system, which contains all three protein components. Addition of N A D H then effects a two-electron reduction of the hydroxylase from the oxidized Fe two plus two F e three plus to the fully reduced Fe two plus two F e two plus form, bypassing the inactive Fe two plus two F e three plus state. The fully reduced hydroxylase next reacts with dioxygen in a two-electron step to form a diiron three peroxide complex which, either itself or upon transformation via two more electron transfer steps at the diiron center, is sufficiently activated to attack the hydrocarbon substrate. The nature of this transformed species, if it exists, is currently unknown, but it could involve a high-valent iron oxo moiety, by analogy with that proposed for cytochrome P- four fifty. The second iron atom in the mono-oxygenase hydroxylase active site would stabilize such a unit through redox charge delocalization, as shown in Scheme three, in much the same fashion that cytochrome P- four fifty is thought to facilitate the formation of a high-valent iron oxo species through oxidation of the porphyrin ring to a pi-cation radical. Alternatively, the internal two-electron transfer step could produce an active site radical R prime, such as the hydroxyl radical or a ligand-based radical involving an amino acid residue, and an iron four center that would again be stabilized by tautomerization and electron transfer involving the other iron atom, Scheme three. Although there is presently no direct evidence for such a radical species in the mono-oxygenase hydroxylase active site, the combination of a redox-active metal with a protein-derived radical to effect oxygen-activated redox transformations is known in the related iron enzyme ribonucleotide reductase, in the heme peroxidase prostaglandin H synthase,

and in the copper enzyme galactose oxidase. A third possibility is that the diiron three peroxide unit itself might be sufficiently activated to carry out the hydroxylation reaction. As depicted in Scheme three, the peroxide ligand might perhaps be coordinated to the diiron three unit in an eta two, eta two fashion, analogous to the binding mode thought to be important in dicopper enzymes that transport or activate dioxygen, for example, hemocyanin and tyrosinase. Other modes of peroxide binding to one or both iron atoms are possible, as indicated in Chart two. Several important model studies have provided spectroscopic evidence for the existence of diiron three peroxides; related species, including a high-valent iron oxo intermediate, have been implicated in hydroxylation and epoxidation reactions. None has yet been structurally characterized, however.

Once the activated iron center, whatever it may be, is discharged, product is released with concomitant formation of the diiron three form of the hydroxylase that enters another cycle in the catalysis, Scheme two. A peroxide shunt, analogous to that found in the P- four fifty enzyme, has been reported for the methylosinus trichosporium O B three b mono-oxygenase and confirmed by us in the present work. As indicated in Scheme two, the use of hydrogen peroxide permits hydroxylation reactions to occur in the absence of the coupling and reductase proteins. Addition of hydrogen peroxide to hydroxylase isolated from the methylosinus capsulatus Bath organism, however, displays only five to ten percent of the activity measured with the complete, three-protein system.

Mechanistic Considerations: The Hydroxylation Reaction. Scheme four presents six possible mechanisms for substrate hydroxylation following generation of the dioxygen-activated diiron center. In all cases except the last, O-O bond cleavage occurs prior to the C-H bond breaking step. The six possibilities are (A) direct insertion of the oxygen atom of a high-valent iron oxo species into a C-H bond; (B) concerted addition of the C-H bond to the high-valent iron oxo species to form a metal-carbon bond followed by reductive elimination of the alcohol; (C) heterolytic attack of a high-valent iron oxo species on the R-H bond followed by recombination to afford product; (D) homolytic attack of a high-valent iron oxo species on the R-H bond followed by return


## Hydrocarbon Hydroxylation by Methane Monooxygenase

of the hydroxyl group from iron to the alkyl radical, a so-called oxygen rebound step; (E) abstraction of a hydrogen atom from the substrate by hydroxyl or another radical within the active site to form an alkyl radical, which then adds to the iron-bound oxygen atom; and (F) electrophilic attack of a n two, n two peroxide or related species (Chart two) on the substrate to form a carbon-oxygen bond followed by release of product. Mechanisms D and E involve transient formation of a substrate-derived alkyl radical, which could rearrange as shown in Scheme one, and it is these pathways that are directly addressed by the present investigation. The carbocation shown in mechanism C two could also rearrange, and its involvement in the hydroxylation reaction would similarly be revealed by our studies.

Experiments reported here and previously with MMO from M. trichosporium indicate that a radical is formed in the catalytic cycle, and a paper has recently appeared reporting results that are consistent with a radical or carbocationic intermediate. No ring-opened products are observed during the hydroxylation of substrate probes one through four with MMO from M. capsulatus, however. There are several possible explanations for these results. The simplest is that radicals and carbocations do not form and that pathways C two, D, and E can be excluded for the reaction mechanism for MMO from this organism. Alternatively, radicals could form but recombine rapidly with the high-valent iron oxo moiety before they have a chance to ring open. Although this alternative is reasonable for probes three and, possibly, four, it is not a viable explanation for one and two since it would require a radical rebound rate constant greater than four times ten to the thirteenth power per second. This conclusion is only valid, however, provided that the hydroxylase active site does not perturb the ring-opening rate constant of probes one and two. Moreover, there are other potential problems arising in probe substrate oxidations within enzyme active sites, as delineated in a recent report of cytochrome P-four fifty dependent enzyme oxidations. In that study, two "poorly behaved" probes gave much less than the expected amount of rearranged product. In addition to decreasing the rate constant for radical rearrangement owing to steric effects, the low yields of rearranged products might arise from a possible change in mechanism, for example, the onset of an insertion reaction, an increase in the rate constant of oxygen rebound, or reaction of the rearranged radical with another site on the enzyme.

tions.22 In that study, two "poorly behaved" probes gave much less than the expected amount of rearranged product. In addition to decreasing the rate constant for radical rearrangement owing to steric effects, the low yields of rearranged products might arise from a possible change in mechanism, for example, the onset of an insertion reaction, an increase in the rate constant of oxygen rebound, or reaction of the rearranged radical with another site on the enzyme.

Two of these potential problems can be excluded as the reason for the failure to detect ring-opened alcohols in the present study. Because the rearrangement of radical U' to R' (Scheme one) is fast enough to compete with any other process, it is not possible that acceleration of the oxygen rebound step without a diminution in the rate constant for the radical rearrangement could subvert the rearrangement. Furthermore, if ring-opened radicals were to react with another position in the enzyme active site, then the probe would most likely have deactivated the enzyme as a suicide substrate inhibitor. Although an extensive analysis of enzyme activity was not conducted for these substrates, there did not appear to be a noticeable loss of activity over the fifteen-minute time course in these studies.

The other possibility, that constraints of the enzyme active site alter the rate constant for radical rearrangement, is subtle and cannot be excluded. It is possible, for example, that the orientation of the phenyl group in enzyme-bound probe one is controlled by the steric confinement of the active site so as to preclude coalignment of the pi-system of the phenyl ring with the bond of the cyclopropane ring that is cleaved. The imposition of such a stereoelectronic effect on the ring-opening reaction might result in a marked reduction in the rate constant for ring opening of the radical derived from one. In the extreme case where the pi-system of the phenyl ring is oriented perpendicularly to the cyclopropyl ring bond that is opened, the contribution of a phenyl resonance effect to the cyclopropyl-carbinyl bond breaking step would be eliminated, leaving only an inductive effect.

The manifestation of an active site constraint-enforced stereoelectronic effect on the kinetics of ring opening can be estimated semiquantitatively via Marcus theory. We have shown that the rate constants for reactions of the parent system, ring opening of the cyclopropylcarbinyl radical five to the three-butenyl radical six and cyclization of radical six, can be used to predict rate constants for ring openings of substituted cyclopropylcarbinyl radicals. In brief, the rate constant for ring opening of five at twenty-five degrees Celsius (k equals five times ten to the seventh power per second for cleavage of one bond) and that for cyclization of six left parenthesis k sub r equals eight thousand per second right parenthesis to the power of sixty-eight give delta G to the power of naught equals negative five point two kilocalories per mole delta G to the power of star has been measured to be six point nine kilocalories per mole. Solving the Marcus equation, equation five, with these values gives delta G to the power of sharp sub j equals nine point three two kilocalories per mole, the intrinsic

Delta G star equals Delta G star sub I plus Delta G nought divided by two plus left parenthesis Delta G nought right parenthesis squared divided by sixteen Delta G star sub I

activation energy expected for a thermoneutral cyclopropylcarbinyl radical ring opening. This value of Delta G star sub I can be used in equation five to calculate widetilde Delta G superscript I for cyclopropylcarbinyl ring openings of varying exergonicity. Figure two shows a plot of log bar k, as a function of the exergonicity of the reaction.

Comparisons of standard bond dissociation energies can be used to estimate the exergonicity of the cyclopropylcarbinyl ring-opening reactions. The bond dissociation energy for a benzylic hydrogen in toluene is ten to eleven kilocalories per mole smaller than that of a primary C-H bond in ethane or propane. For the benzylic position in ethylbenzene, the bond dissociation energy is reduced by approximately two point five kilocalories per mole from that of toluene. Thus, the ring opening of the radical derived from one is expected to be about twelve point five to thirteen point five kilocalories per mole more exergonic than that of five, giving a value of Delta G nought equals negative eighteen point two kilocalories per mole. If we assume that the full overlap of the X-system of the phenyl ring is available in the transition state for ring opening of the radical derived from one, then the predicted rate constant for ring opening of this radical at twenty-five degrees Celsius is one times ten to the power of eleven reciprocal seconds. Given the crude nature of the analysis, this value compares favorably with the observed rate constant of three times ten to the power of eleven reciprocal seconds. If the phenyl group in the radical derived from one is locked such that its pi r-system cannot overlap fully with the breaking bond in the cyclopropyl ring, the resonance stabilization would be a function of cosine squared theta, where theta is the dihedral angle of the breaking bond and the pi T-system of the phenyl ring. When the latter is orthogonal to the breaking bond left parenthesis theta equals ninety degrees right parenthesis, the effect of the phenyl group would be reduced to approximately that of the inductive effect of an alkyl group. In this extreme case, the appropriate model reaction for the Marcus analysis would be one in which the exergonicity of the ring-opening reaction is only about two point five to three kilocalories per mole greater than that of five on the basis of the differences in bond dissociation energy between primary and secondary alkane C C-H bonds. This per second value gives a predicted rate constant at twenty-five degrees Celsius of about four times ten to the power of eight Using the two limiting cases discussed above, corresponding to phenyl stabilization of between three and thirteen kilocalories per mole, the stereoelectronic effect of an enforced position begin array end array in the radical derived from one is shown on the selected dihedral angles. When theta is for ring opening at twenty-five degrees Celsius is reduced two times ten to the power of nine reciprocal seconds, one order of magnitude less than the oxygen rebound rate constants found in P-four hundred fifty oxidations. Because it is possible that an oxygen rebound rate constant in the MMO hydroxylase is faster than that found in the P-four hundred fifty studies, further reduction of the rate constant for ring opening of the radical derived from one could lead to undetectably small amounts of ring-opened alcohol product one b. Thus the absence of one b from oxidation of probe one could result from an extreme alteration in the rate constant for ring opening of the derived cyclopropylcarbinyl radical in the enzyme active site.

Although the Marcus analysis demonstrates that a stereoelectronic reduction in the rate constant for ring opening of a radical derived from one is a possible explanation for the absence of ring-opened alcohol one b, it should be recalled that no ring-opened product formed in the hydroxylation of the closely related substrate two. A significant reduction in the rate constant for ring opening of the radical derived from this substrate probe due to steric effects in the active site is less likely. In this case, both phenyl groups must be held such that their pi T-systems are virtually orthogonal to the breaking bond in order to reduce resonance stabilization in the transition state for opening, a much less probable situation. Moreover, such an arrangement would require that the phenyl groups approach coplanarity with one another, a geometry that would increase steric interactions between them. The results from probe two therefore suggest that a radical or carbocation is not formed and that the hydroxylation mechanism involves one of the alternative pathways A, B, C left parenthesis one right parenthesis, or F in Scheme four.

There is another factor to consider with regard to the results with probe one. The discussion of steric effects on the rate constant for ring opening of substrate-derived radical ignored the fact that two enantiomers of this substrate were allowed to react with the chiral enzyme. If sterics-enforced stereoelectronic effects were operative, it is unlikely that both enantiomeric radicals derived from the enantiomers of the probe would suffer similar ring-opening rate retardations. The formation of aryl hydroxylated product in amounts comparable to the amount of alcohol one A produced complicates the analysis, however. As indicated above, it is likely that the two different products are derived from the two different enantiomers of the probe substrate. Further studies with enantiomerically pure probes are planned to resolve this question.

Aside from steric factors within the active site, other considerations to explain the lack of rearranged substrate with M. capsulatus Bath must be addressed. For example, one cannot rule out that the hydroxylation reaction may proceed through two different mechanisms from a common intermediate. One pathway, D or E, could involve a substrate radical, thus accounting for the rearranged products observed with MMO from M. trichosporium O B three B. An alternative pathway could involve mechanism A, B, C, or F. The specific pathway chosen would then depend on the energetics of the substrate. It is possible, however, that the frequency with which each pathway is followed may differ between the two organisms. Alternatively, MMO from M. capsulatus Bath and M. trichosporium O B three B may exhibit different hydroxylation mechanisms, which would explain the presence of ring-opened products for the latter.

We now return to the intramolecular deuterium isotope effect of five point one observed for the hydroxylation of deuterated one. Although an isotope effect of this magnitude is generally associated with processes that involve a relatively linear transition state, such as would occur for oxygen rebound, mechanisms containing intramolecular cyclic transition states cannot be excluded. In fact, dimethyldioxirane, a reagent believed to oxidize hydrocarbons via an insertion process, oxidized cyclododecane-d zero and d twenty-four with an isotope effect of five point seven seven. Thus our observed value of five point one would be consistent with pathways A, B, C one, and F, all of which involve transition states for C-H bond cleavage that resemble the dioxirane oxygen insertion process and avoid the formation of a substrate radical or carbocation in the catalytic cycle. The


## Hydrocarbon Hydroxylation by Methane Monooxygenase

previous observation of an N I H shift in the hydroxylation of aromatic substrates with MMO from M. capsulatus Bath would support such a mechanism.

In summary, the failure of substrate probes one and two to form rearranged alcohol products upon hydroxylation with the M. capsulatus Bath MMO is best interpreted in terms of a mechanism that does not involve the formation of a radical or carbocation, namely, A, B, C one, or F. It is unlikely that the enzyme active site induces a stereoelectronic barrier to ring opening. The fact that the same amount, eighty-five percent, of the probe, both converted and unconverted, can be recovered from the enzymatic reaction mixture under hydroxylation conditions or in control reactions omitting N A D H indicates that ring-opened substrate radical has not formed and been lost in the extraction procedure. In addition, these probes do not lead to inactivation of the enzyme over the time course of the reactions, indicating that ring-opened product has not formed and reacted with the enzyme. The kinetic isotope results are consistent with a concerted pathway for C-H bond insertion for the key hydroxylation step.

Comparisons with Related Work. The MMO mechanism is almost always drawn in analogy to that of cytochrome P four hundred fifty. In particular, a catalytic cycle involving an iron oxo intermediate that abstracts H' from the alkane, mechanism D, has been proposed by several authors. The ability of high concentrations of hydrogen peroxide to effect a shunt pathway for the M. trichosporium O B three B MMO has been cited as evidence for heterolytic cleavage of the O-O bond, although it is noteworthy that, unlike the situation for cytochrome P four hundred fifty, other oxo-transfer reagents could not be substituted for hydrogen peroxide. Hydrogen peroxide does not operate at comparable levels in the M. capsulatus Bath system. Various authors have invoked radical intermediates for the hydroxylation reaction. For example, exo, exo, exo, exo-two, three, five, six-d four-norbornane epimerizes upon hydroxylation by M. trichosporium O B three B MMO, a result that has its parallels in cytochrome P four hundred fifty chemistry. The extent of epimerization with MMO, however, was significantly less, being two percent following hydrogen atom abstraction from the endo position compared to eighteen percent with cytochrome P four hundred fifty, and five percent after abstraction at the exo position compared to fourteen percent with cytochrome P four hundred fifty. Similarly, allylic rearrangements occurred in twenty percent of the MMO hydroxylation products from three, three, six, six-d four-cyclohexene compared to thirty-three percent with cytochrome P four hundred fifty. Mechanistic studies of MMO from M. trichosporium O B three B with the free radical probe one, one-dimethylcyclopropane and with S and R one-two-H, one-three-H-ethane were also consistent with radical formation, but cationic intermediates could not be ruled out. It has also been claimed that radical intermediates can be trapped during methane hydroxylation by the MMO of M. capsulatus Bath. In addition, the mechanism for olefin epoxidation by MMO from M. trichosporium O B three B differs from that believed to occur with cytochrome P four hundred fifty. With cytochrome P four hundred fifty, the one-trans proton of propylene exchanges with solvent protons during turnover, leading to the hypothesis that the epoxidation mechanism involves oxametallocycles and iron carbene intermediates. In the reaction of propylene with MMO, however, no such exchange occurred.

In view of these and the present results, it would appear that no single unifying mechanism can account for all of the data. Instead, it seems likely to us that more than one mechanism might be operative, depending upon factors such as the steric demands of the substrate at the active site of the hydroxylase, the organism from which the M M O is isolated, and even the temperature at which the hydroxylation is carried out. There are differences in the coupling proteins obtained from the M. capsulatus Bath and M. trichosporium O B three b organisms, which could alter the properties of the system. Moreover, it should be recalled that the M. capsulatus Bath methanotroph was isolated from thermal waters and has its optimal monooxygenase activity at forty-five degrees Celsius, whereas the M M O from M. trichosporium O B three b is typically assayed at ambient temperature twenty-three degrees Celsius. Further studies, involving additional mechanistic probes and the application of other methodologies, are currently in progress to provide further insight into these issues.


## Conclusions. The major findings of this investigation may be summarized as follows:

One. The absence of ring-opened products in the hydroxylation of probes one and two suggests that the mechanism for M M O from M. capsulatus Bath may not involve radicals or carbocations, at least for these substrates.

Two. Isotope-effect studies with deuterated probe one indicate that the hydroxylation step is not rate-determining in the overall M M O mechanism but that substantial C-H bond activation is involved in this step.

Three. The observation that equimolar quantities of phenol and alcohol are produced in the hydroxylations of racemic mixtures of one and its trideuterated analogue implies that chiral discrimination in the enzyme active site can dictate the regiospecificity of the reaction.

Four. A semiquantitative Marcus theory analysis was used to evaluate how the ring-opening rate constant of phenyl-substituted cyclopropanes can be tuned by changing the dihedral angle between the phenyl and cyclopropyl rings.

Five. Several detailed proposals have been set forth for two discrete arcs of the M M O catalytic cycle, the activation of the reduced, diiron two form by dioxygen, and the subsequent hydroxylation step. These considerations should serve as a valuable reference point for the interpretation of mechanistic results from diiron oxo and related monooxygenases as well as their model compounds.

Six. Analysis of the present and literature results for the hydroxylation of hydrocarbons by M M O suggests that multiple mechanisms may be operative.