## 7bdk-2024-09-03_20_07_33-carbon.pdf

The revised approaches to income inequality impact on production-based and consumption-based carbon dioxide emissions: literature review


## Abstract

In recent decades, many authors have investigated the possibility of simultaneous reduction of income inequality and pollution related to climate change. However, none of the previous researches reviewed the empirical studies of the relationship between inequality and carbon dioxide emissions. The authors of the selected papers, published from two thousand one to two thousand nineteen, found a diverse impact of income inequality on carbon dioxide emissions. It could depend on different trajectories of Kuznets curves. Furthermore, the majority of authors have provided theoretical analysis (even including human behavior) of the influence of income inequality on carbon dioxide emissions, considering only territorial (or production-based) emissions. However, this paper recommends distinguishing between the production-based and consumption-based emissions and suggests revised approaches to the impact of income inequality on carbon dioxide emissions with regard to the production-based and consumption-based emissions. Regarding the production-based emissions, the following approaches are proposed: determination of environmental policies, which also could reveal and explain the leakage phenomenon, and the channels of Environmental Kuznets Curve, namely scale, composition, technical, and globalization effects. The influence of income inequality on consumption-based emissions can be explained by applying two approaches, namely inequality determined changes in working time (this approach is also related to the Veblen effect) and individual economic behaviors of households. Therefore, the present study provides a new insight into the subject of the relationship between income inequality and pollution related to climate change.


## Introduction

Climate change and economic inequality are faced as the biggest challenges in recent decades. The main consequences of climate change include polar ice shield melting, sea level rising, and more frequent extreme weather events such as heavy rains, heat waves, and droughts. Thus, the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions is crucial for mitigation of climate change consequences. Unequal societies badly affect sustainability and well-being as well. The authors have identified that inequality influences health and social problems, impels poverty-driven migration, decreases economic growth due to changes in fiscal policies, and undermines human capital. Therefore, a large number of authors have investigated whether these two problems, i.e. inequality and pollution related to climate change, could be solved simultaneously.

A discussion concerning the impact of income inequality on carbon dioxide emissions originated in the nineteen nineties. A majority of studies theoretically and empirically analyzed the relationship between inequality and environmental pollution. However, to the best of our knowledge, none of them has reviewed the empirical studies of the relationship between inequality and carbon dioxide emissions. Thus, in this paper, by reviewing the selected papers published from two thousand one to two thousand nineteen, the impact of inequality on carbon dioxide emissions in developing and developed countries is presented.

2019a). However, to the best of our knowledge, none of them has reviewed the empirical studies of relationship between inequality and CO2 emissions. Thus, in this paper, by reviewing the selected papers published from 2001 to 2019, the impact of inequality on CO2 emissions in developing and developed countries is presented.

Empirical studies on inequality and environmental impact offer diverse results. Grunewald et al. has stated that different links between inequality and environmental impact vary with the level of inequality. Chow and Li together with Ibrahim and Law have argued that the links between economic development and pollution are moderated by the income inequality level. Moreover, the change in the relationship between these variables is moderated by the level of economic development. Therefore, in this paper, referring to Kuznets curve theory, which was applied to both inequality and environmental impact, particular attention was paid to revealing three possible alternatives: the countries trace the same Kuznets curve trajectory; the turn points are different, and in the case of inequality reduction, the environmental pollution increases (or vice versa); and Kuznets trajectories are different; for income inequality, a U-shape is observed, although for environmental impact, it has an inverted U-shape (or vice versa). To my best knowledge, this aspect has still not been considered in scientific literature. Furthermore, this article presents the differences between the impact channels through which economic development affects inequality and carbon dioxide emissions.

Theoretical links of the relationship between environmental degradation (as air pollution level) and the inequality level are still required for a complete understanding of the reasons. Authors analyzing the inequality impact on carbon dioxide emissions mostly used three approaches: political economy explanation, marginal propensity to emit carbon dioxide, and individual economic behavior. However, these approaches are not suitable to explore the inequality impact on national carbon dioxide emissions, which is production-based. The argument that different consumer behavior (particularly consumption level) influences national emissions (which are production-based) might be a misconception considering that the major share of goods which people consume is imported or exported and thus related to the environmental impact in foreign countries. Therefore, analyzing approaches to the relationship between inequality and pollution, the type of emissions (consumption or production-based) should be considered. Therefore, in this paper, the revised approaches to the impact of income inequality on production-based and consumption-based carbon dioxide emissions were suggested. These aspects, presumably, have not been analyzed yet, and the present paper provides new insights into the subject.


## The impact of income inequality on carbon dioxide emissions with regard to economic development level

In order to thoroughly explore the influence of inequality on carbon dioxide emissions at different economic development levels, the databases ScienceDirect, Google Scholar, and Web of Science were exploited by applying a query "inequality and greenhouse gas emissions (carbon dioxide)". All papers published from two thousand one to two thousand nineteen were selected where authors empirically evaluated the links between inequality and carbon dioxide emissions. In the presentation of the results, countries were classified as low-, middle-, and high-income countries, and a wide range of developed and developing countries. The relationship be- tween income inequality and carbon dioxide emissions was also distinguished as positive, negative, and neutral (or insignificant). Results in Table one revealed diverse results regarding the level of economic development. The impact of inequality on carbon emissions was different in developing and developed countries. These different results highlight the versatile role of inequality in carbon dioxide emissions.

Authors show different effects of inequality on pollution related to different shapes of environmental Kuznets curve like inverted U-shape, U-shape, and linearity. They proposed that when the EKC curve was depicted as an "inverted U," the redistribution from the rich individuals to the poor contributes to the emission rise in connection with the decrease of the income inequality level. Conversely, in the case of a "U" shape, the enlargement of income inequality would contribute to the growth of emissions. When EKC relationship is linear, inequality has insignificant effect on environmental pollution. However, economic development is connected not only to environmental quality but also to income inequality level. Kuznets curve was applied for both variables. Hence, if countries trace the same trajectory of Kuznets curve, and the turn point is rather similar, then the positive relationship between inequality and carbon dioxide emissions is observed. In this case, pollution related to climate change is compatible with income inequality, and a process of economic development can resolve these issues, reduction of inequality and pollution, at the same time.

Yet, in the case of economic growth, the environmental impact can decrease or, put in other words, match the right side of the EKC. Alternatively, when the economic development level stays the same, income inequality does not reach the turn point and remains on the left side of Kuznets curve and vice versa. In these circumstances, according to the proposed model, the negative correlation between inequality level and carbon dioxide emissions is observed. The negative relationship between inequality and carbon dioxide emissions can occur when a U-shaped trajectory of one variable income inequality level or carbon dioxide emissions is observed instead of the inverted U-shape. The relationship is insignificant when pollution or inequality level of the countries correspond to the turn point. Therefore, different correlations between the income inequality level and carbon dioxide emissions with regard to the economic development level could be observed due to the different Kuznets curve trajectories. In addition, when analyzing links between income inequality and environmental impact, the channels through which economic development affects inequality and environmental pollution should be considered.


## The channels through which the economic growth affects carbon dioxide emissions and income inequality

A large number of authors have analyzed the EKC and identified that the relationship between air pollution or other type environmental degradation and economic level depends on three channels: one, scale, two, composition and three, technique. Besides, the same channels pertain to the influence of economic development on income inequality level. However, the effects of these channels are different.

Factors that are assigned to the scale effect as economic development level gross domestic product contribute to the increase of environmental impact. Neagu and Teodoru found that economic complexity improved capabilities of a country in the production process has a statistically significant impact on carbon dioxide emissions. Meanwhile, Barro argued that income inequality decreases due to economic growth in early stage of development level. Labor market is also related to the economic growth. Economic development can lessen inequality by allowing workers, who earn the least, to move from the informal employment sector to the formal. He and Feng pointed out that employment could improve income distribution. Castells-Quintana also noted that in the European Union, inequality is higher in regions with higher unemployment.

Considering the composition effect or the changes in economic structure with regard to the EKC, the reduction of environmental impact is observed when sectors which are not very polluting i.e. services sector increase faster than the most polluting ones i.e. manufacturing, industry. Transfer from agriculture to manufacturing at first increases and then decreases income inequality. Moreover, Castells-Quintana indicated that the inequality level is higher where the employment in agriculture or trade sectors is higher. A higher employment in the construction sector is also positively related to the higher-income inequality level. He and Feng revealed that industrialization could improve income distribution, which is not very favorable for the environment. However, the impact that a shift to the service sector makes on income inequality has still not been analyzed. In this paper, it is suggested that a faster growth of the service sector can also contribute to the reduction of inequality level because the wage gap in this sector is not very big. Furthermore, the less qualified work can also be included in the service sector.

The technique channel is related to the development of technologies and innovations in the countries. With regard to the EKC, the development of technologies has led to the reduction of environmental pollution. Meanwhile, regarding the income inequality, the development of the technologies may benefit the relatively richer population and contribute to the increase of income inequality. If technological development benefits the qualified labor or richer individuals more than the unqualified labor, the skill premium will increase, which should raise the income inequality level.

Globalization, via trade and foreign direct investments, can also be attributed to an additional channel through which economic development affects environmental impact and income inequality. When discussing carbon dioxide emissions, the reviewed authors provide different results. Some authors found that foreign direct investment and trade contribute to economic growth and to the degradation of environment at the same time. Other authors showed that foreign direct investment and trade contribute to economic development due to technology development, productivity and efficiency gains, and promotion of new and more innovative processes and managerial skills resulting in the reduction of environmental impact in host countries. As far as income inequality is concerned, the mechanisms of foreign direct investment and trade openness differ, and the results of the estimations are different as well.

Therefore, the reviewed results display that, in the case of economic development, income inequality level and carbon dioxide emissions could change differently and separate channels affect these variables differently.


## The approaches to the influence of income inequality on production- and consumption-based emissions.

Almost all authors have analysed the relationship between income inequality and territorial or production-based carbon dioxide emissions. However, only few of the studies have estimated the consumption-based emissions or analysed the consumption-based emission inequality. Baker and Jorgenson emphasize that research should focus on international inequality impact on both consumption- and production-based carbon dioxide emissions. With respect to the production-based emissions, the leakage phenomenon should also be considered, which is defined as a process where the transfer of dirty industries to the emerging economies with weak regulatory systems rather than the increase in production efficiency and productivity accounts for the decrease of carbon dioxide emissions in the developed countries.

Three theories have been proposed by the authors that theoretically analyse the approaches of relationship between income inequality and environmental impact: political economy explanation (in this paper, it is renamed as determination of environmental policies), which was suggested by Boyce; economic behaviours of households (the latter theory overlaps with the MPE theory), suggested by Ravallion et al., and "Veblen effect"; inequality determined changes in working time, which could also be attributed to "Veblen effect", discussed by Bowles and Park. These theories were widely discussed by other authors. However, the authors who presented these theories usually referred to the production-based emissions. Meanwhile, in this paper, it is assumed that all the abovementioned approaches do not


## Political economy explanation.

Economic behaviours of households.


## Inequality determined changes in working time.

adequately explain the relationship between inequality and territorial (or production-based) carbon dioxide emissions. Thus, it is emphasized that the approaches should be separated when analysing the production and consumption-based carbon dioxide emissions. The following sections propose the separate approaches to the influence of income inequality on the production-based and consumption-based emissions.


## The approaches to income inequality impact on production-based carbon dioxide emissions.

Regarding the production-based carbon dioxide emissions, only two of the abovementioned approaches are appropriate: determination of environmental policies and inequality determined changes in working time. Determination of environmental policies operates mainly via political influence due to the changes in income inequality. Boyce hypothesized that the increasing demand for "the environment" is related to the increase in income. Therefore, in the countries where the inequality level is usually low, the prevailing higher environmental standards condition lower levels of emissions. Other authors state that the reduction of environmental impact might request a higher political and economic equality at first. Meanwhile, according to Franzen and Vogl and Berthe and Elie, a higher level of income inequality causes the material and social problems to take priority over the environmental aspects. Thus, inequality renders the agreement on environmental policies and implementation of these policies more difficult. In developing countries, where the level of income inequality is usually high, the environmental standards are low. Grunewald et al. suggested that the growth of income inequality impedes environmental policy solutions to emerging issues, which subsequently conditions that the growth of inequality can contribute to the increase of air pollutions.

Besides, expensive environmental protection in wealthy countries generates the transfer of dirty production to poor countries, where the environmental standards are low. Consequently, due to the leakage phenomenon, the carbon dioxide emissions increase in developing or of higher inequality countries, while in developed or of lesser inequality countries, the pollution level decreases. Furthermore, within countries, rich communities reap disproportionate benefits from dirty activities and avoid the negative consequences of their production by moving polluting industrial activities into less rich areas. This reveals that income inequality promotes and enhances the implementation of environment-polluting projects, which strengthens the power of the rich society to impose environmental fine on the poor. Hence, for the less developed countries, inequality is as an obstacle for the mobilization of the collective effort essential for confronting environmental pollution and carbon dioxide emissions. Moreover, Gassebner et al. and Grunewald et al. stated that rising income inequality in less rich countries is related to industrial reduction and a decrease of producers' political power, thereby reducing their ability to decrease environmental impact.

With regard to the second approach, Bowles and Park reveal that income inequality increases working hours and consequently contributes to the growth of energy consumption and carbon dioxide emissions. Furthermore, the latter approach in this paper contributed to the explication of the theories on the impact of income inequality on production-based carbon dioxide emissions. In addition, it separated the effects of scale, composition, technique and globalization. Therefore, the abovementioned channels of EKC, by the means of which economic growth affects environmental quality, could be applied when analysing the relationship between inequality and carbon dioxide emissions. Thus, the inequality determined changes in working time could be attributed to the scale effect, when income inequality contributes to an increase in working hours and, analogically, to economic growth.

Inequality, via contribution to economic growth, influences the growth of environmental pollution.

Referring to the composition effect, Gassebner et al. declared that in developed countries the increasing level of inequality is related to the industrial decline, which in turn reduces pollution. Meanwhile, in poorer countries, the rising industrial sector leads to the reduction of environmental regulations, when richer segments of population are related to the growing industrial sector. Consequently, these arguments reveal that in both poor and rich countries, different links between income inequality and carbon dioxide pollution could be observed.

In terms of the technique effect, the reviewed authors revealed that a high level of inequality negatively affects the diffusion of environmental technologies and innovations. Thus, a high level of inequality can influence the reduction of technologies, which determines the increase of carbon emissions.

Inequality level also influences trade and foreign direct investment transfers. With the high level of inequality investors are not inclined to invest, and in such countries, it is hard to develop international trade. Therefore, inequality via the globalization effect can contribute to either reduction or growth of carbon dioxide pollution. It depends on whether trade and foreign direct investment enhance or reduce environmental impact.


## The approaches to the influence of income inequality on consumption-based carbon dioxide emissions

The influence of income inequality on consumption-based carbon emissions can be explained referring to the following two approaches: (i) inequality determined changes in working time (which is also suitable in the case of production-based emissions and is related to "Veblen effect") and (ii) individual economic behaviours of households (or individual

With regard to the changes in working hours, authors have stated that people work more in order to copy the lifestyle of individuals who have higher status. Thus, at the same time, the increase in working time contributes to economic growth and to the consumption increase as well, influencing the growth of pollution. In consumer society, people usually work more in order to buy more and to consequently support the self-image. It is particularly typical in unequal countries due to "Veblen effect". Veblen hypothesized that people from different social classes are more inclined to compare their lifestyle with other individuals from a higher social class and to mimic their consumption style. Particularly, it is observed in more unequal societies. Consequently, due to the Veblen status, consumption or, put in other words, the consumption competition, wealthier or higher-income groups are more inclined to consume large amounts of goods and services and thus determine the environmental pollution.

With regard to the individual consumption level, the MPE indicates that at various levels of income and inequality distribution, individuals' propensities to consume more polluting goods differ due to the change in the patterns of consumption level. Hence, Jorgenson declared that consumption level was the key factor influencing the MPE. However, there is not a single hypothesis analyzing the inequality influence on consumption-based carbon dioxide emissions. The main condition of the changes in income inequality affecting the consumption-based carbon emissions depends on the MPE ratio between materially wealthy and poor people. If poor people's MPE is bigger than that of the wealthy, an increase in inequality reduces carbon dioxide emissions. Authors assumed that due to higher prices resulting from environmentally friendly production, the poorest people cannot afford to buy any of these products. Furthermore, these people are not inclined to choose to use renewable electricity. Moreover, larger income distribution would decrease individuals' environmental concern, and vice versa, the environmental quality is more important for rich people and they have higher environmental concern. The assumption that the MPE is bigger if compared with richer countries corresponds to the Keynesian model when lower-income individuals, rather than higher income, have a higher marginal tendency to consume, so the growth of inequality reduces the income of the poor and decreases the emissions. A large number of authors identified that the MPE falls with the level of income. Meanwhile, if low-income individuals have a lower level of MPE than the high income, the growth of income inequality raises carbon dioxide emissions. Authors declared that due to different consumption levels, the rich people more negatively influence environmental impact than the poor individuals. Furthermore, according to authors, the rich people are not necessarily pro-environmentally friendly, and they are not willing to assume the responsibility and the costs of environmental issues. Therefore, the reduction of income inequality is shown to reduce consumption-based carbon pollution, which suggests that the reduction of income inequality and carbon dioxide emissions can be achieved simultaneously. In other case, when the income inequality is more balanced, the consumption of more polluting goods increases due to the shift of poor people to the middle class. Hence, inequality can raise the middle social groups' willingness to achieve the superior (wealthy) social group's patterns of consumption (Veblen effect), causing greater environmental impact by increasing the consumption level.

Insignificant relationship between inequality and pollution reveals that when income becomes more equally distributed, the individuals from the poor class will increase their consumption of energy and other polluting products as they transfer to the middle class. Thus, when the three classes of individuals (poor, middle and rich) are considered, the relationship between inequality and environmental pollution may not be linear. The propensity to emit may rise and then descend, which causes the curvilinear link between inequality and environmental pollution. Furthermore, constant emission intensity across the income classes would reveal that any income redistribution would have an insignificant or no impact on consumption-based emissions. In conclusion, the possible influence of inequality on environmental pollution via individual behaviors depends on MPE and changes in the social norms.


## Conclusions

In recent decades, the environmental research has paid much attention to the analysis whether the reduction of income inequality and pollution related to climate change could be achieved simultaneously. By reviewing the selected papers published from two thousand one to twenty nineteen, where these experts empirically evaluated the impact of inequality on carbon emissions, the author of the present article identified that the links between inequality and carbon dioxide emissions were different in developing and developed countries. The different results reveal that the role of inequality on carbon dioxide pollution is quite versatile. Referring to Kuznets curve, which was applied for both income inequality and environmental quality, it was assumed that the aforementioned different results could derive from the different trajectories of Kuznets curve. Therefore, if countries trace the same trajectory of Kuznets curve, a positive impact of inequality on environmental impact is observed. If environmental impact matches the right side of the EKC but income inequality has not reached the turn point at the same economic development level and stays on the left side of Kuznets curve, a negative relationship between the level of inequality and pollution is recognized. The negative relationship between inequality and carbon dioxide emissions is observed when the U-shaped trajectory of one variable occurs instead of the inverted U-shape. An insignificant relationship could be observed when the country's pollution or inequality level matches the turn point. These Kuznets curve trajectory differences depend on the differences of impact channels through which economic development affects inequality and environmental pollution. This paper presented the following four channels: one. scale, two. composition, three. technique and four. globalization, through which economic development affects both carbon dioxide emissions and inequality level.

The majority of authors have analyzed theoretical links of inequality impact on carbon dioxide emissions with regard to territorial (or production-based) emissions. This paper suggested to consider the production-based and consumption-based emissions separately when analyzing the approaches to relationship between inequality and pollution. Therefore, the proposed theories according to the origin of emissions were distinguished and new approaches which could explain the influence of income inequality on carbon dioxide emissions were provided.

With respect to the production-based emissions, the following approaches were proposed: determination of environmental policies, which could also reveal and explain the leakage phenomenon, and the channels by the means of which the income inequality affects carbon dioxide emissions: the scale, composition, technique and globalization effects. Therefore, the income inequality determined changes in working time could be attributed to the scale effect, when income inequality contributes to the increase in working hours and analogically to economic growth and carbon dioxide pollution. The composition effect, conditioned by the growth of income inequality, is related to the industrial decline, which in turn reduces pollution in rich countries. In terms of the technique effect, the high level of inequality negatively affects the spread of innovations, consequently harming the environmental technologies' development. Taking into account the globalization effect, inequality also influences trade and foreign direct investment transfers; besides, inequality can contribute to the decrease or growth of carbon dioxide emissions. It depends on whether the trade and foreign direct investment enhance or reduce the environmental impact.

The following two approaches, namely (i) inequality determined changes in working time (which is related to "Veblen effect") and (ii) individual economic behaviours of households (or individual consumption level), which combine the marginal propensity to emit theory and "Veblen effect", contribute to the explanation of the influence of income inequality on consumption-based emissions. Furthermore, the working time increase does not only contribute to economic growth, but to the consumption increase as well, simultaneously influencing the increase of carbon dioxide emissions. This approach is related to "Veblen effect" when in an unequal society, people from different social classes are more inclined to compare themselves with individuals from a superior social class and mimic their consumption level. With regard to the individual consumption level, it should be noted that the consumption demand is a key factor influencing the marginal propensity to emit. The main condition for the changes in income inequality to affect the consumption-based carbon dioxide emissions depends on the marginal propensity to emit ratio of the poor and the wealthy, and changes in social norms. Furthermore, inequality can contribute to the growth of middle social groups' willingness to achieve the superior social group's consumption level ("Veblen effect") and, correspondingly, carbon dioxide emissions.

Therefore, this paper provides new (revised) approaches explaining the impact of inequality level on separate production-based and consumption-based carbon dioxide emissions. Big hopes are held that in the nearest future, our theoretical considerations regarding these theories will be confirmed or corrected by other experts in the field. This study can also provide new insights for the policy makers concerned to seek the reduction of income inequality and pollution related to climate change.