## Accented Artic! G Protein Coupled Receptors and Heterotrimeric G Proteins as Cancer Drivers Nadia Arang and J. Silvio Gutkind

Abstract

G protein coupled receptors and heterotrimeric G proteins play central roles in a diverse array of cellular processes. As such, dysregulation of G protein coupled receptors and their coupled heterotrimeric G proteins can dramatically alter the signalling landscape and functional state of a cell. Consistent with their fundamental physiological functions, G protein coupled receptors and their effector heterotrimeric G proteins are implicated in some of the most prevalent human diseases, including a complex disease such as cancer that causes significant morbidity and mortality worldwide. G protein coupled receptor and G protein-mediated signalling impacts oncogenesis at multiple levels by regulating tumour angiogenesis, immune evasion, metastasis, and drug resistance. Here, we summarize the growing body of research on G protein coupled receptors and their effector heterotrimeric G proteins as drivers of cancer initiation and progression, and as emerging antitumoral therapeutic targets.


## Artic

Keywords:


## Abbreviations:

aG Protein Coupled Receptor: Adhesion G protein coupled receptor

ATP: Adenosine triphosphate bFGF: Basic fibroblast growth factor

BMR: Background mutation rate cAMP: Cyclic adenosine monophosphate

CNV: Copy number variation

COSMIC: Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer

COX: Cyclooxygenase

GAP: GTPase-accelerating protein

GDP: Guanosine diphosphate

GEF: Guanine nucleotide exchange factor

GOF: Gain of function

G Protein Coupled Receptor: G protein coupled receptor

GTP: Guanosine triphosphate

IAP: Islet activating protein

LOF: Loss of function

LPA: Lysophosphatidic acid

LRR: Leucine-rich repeats

MAPK: Mitogen-activated protein kinase

MMP: Matrix metalloproteinase

NAM: Negative allosteric modulator

NGF: Nerve growth factor

ORF: Open reading frame

PAM: Positive allosteric modulator

PG: Prostaglandin

PSA: Prostate specific antigen

RGS: Regulators of G protein signaling

ROS: Reactive oxygen species

RTK: Receptor tyrosine kinase

SRE: Serum response element

TSH: Thyroid stimulating hormone

TCGA: The Cancer Genome Atlas

VEGF: Vascular endothelial growth factor

VGPCRs: Viral G protein coupled receptor


## Introduction

G protein coupled receptors represent the largest family of cell-surface receptors, with over eight hundred G protein coupled receptors and thirty-five heterotrimeric G protein subunits involved in transduction of diverse signalling cascades. G protein coupled receptors are characterized by a distinctive seven-transmembrane domain structure with an extracellular amino terminus and an intracellular carboxyl terminus, and by their ability to couple to heterotrimeric G proteins, comprised of alpha, beta, and gamma subunits, which activate a diverse array of downstream signalling pathways. G protein coupled receptors play key roles in many cellular and physiological functions, including in neurotransmission, cardiac response and blood pressure regulation, vision, olfaction, tissue development and immune regulation.

The human G protein coupled receptor superfamily can be phylogenetically grouped into five subfamilies based on distinct structural features- Class A (rhodopsin), Class B one (secretin), Class B two (adhesion), Class C (glutamate), and Class F (frizzled/taste). Most G protein coupled receptors activate one or multiple G alpha proteins, which bind guanine nucleotides-guanosine diphosphate in their inactive form and guanosine triphosphate in their active form. G alpha proteins are subdivided into four major families: G alpha i, G alpha twelve, G alpha s, and G alpha q, with each family activating a distinct repertoire of signalling mechanisms. G protein coupled receptor activation is initiated by the binding of an agonist ligand to the extracellular domain of the receptor which induces a rapid conformational change in the extracellular and intracellular loops of the receptor. This transition into the active conformation of the receptor results in coupling to the heterotrimeric G proteins and triggers the exchange of guanosine diphosphate for guanosine triphosphate on the G alpha subunit, promoting its dissociation from G beta gamma dimers. Both G alpha-guanosine triphosphate bound and G beta gamma subunit complexes then stimulate downstream signalling cascades, including the rapid generation of multiple second messengers by modulating the activity of ion channels, phospholipases, phosphodiesterases, and adenylyl cyclases. These second messenger generating systems and their downstream regulated kinases cascades are responsible for most of the rapid physiological responses elicited by G protein coupled receptors. In tandem to these processes, Regulators of G protein Signalling proteins enhance the GTPase activity of the G alpha subunit, enabling the reassociation of the G alpha and G beta gamma subunits into a bound heterotrimeric G protein, and returning the protein complex to a guanosine diphosphate-bound inactive state. Moreover, arrestins are recruited to activated G protein coupled receptors to promote receptor endocytosis and can participate in downstream signalling as scaffolds for signalling complexes, and as molecular rheostats of G protein-driven signal transduction. This model of G protein coupled receptor function has been improved over the recent years to encompass various classes of ligands, including agonists, partial agonists, inverse agonists and allosteric modulators, and the detailed structure features of the corresponding G protein coupled receptor conformations that can be stabilized upon binding.

As G protein coupled receptors and their associated heterotrimeric G proteins are involved in a diverse array of signal transduction pathways and cellular processes, dysregulation in either can have significant impacts on cellular behaviour and the initiation of pathogenic processes. This is highlighted by large body of drugs in the market targeting G protein coupled receptors. Indeed, thirty-four percent of all FDA approved drugs currently on the market target G protein coupled receptors directly or indirectly. This review will summarize the growing body of information establishing G protein coupled receptors and heterotrimeric G proteins as drivers of cancer and their roles in cancer initiation and progression.


## Historical Perspective

The earliest evidence suggesting a role for GPCRs in tumorigenesis stems from work demonstrating that expression of a GPCR encoded by the mas oncogene, had the ability to transform and induce foci formation in NIH3T3 fibroblasts, as well as develop tumors in nude mice. This pivotal work was novel in contrast to the many known oncogenes at the time, most of which were discovered based on the transforming activity of oncogenic viruses. These findings were reinforced by the observation that ectopic expression of the five HT one C serotonin receptor led to transformation of NIH3T3 cells. However, in both cases the receptors did not harbour any identifiable mutations, contrasting with most viral and human oncogenes, and these observations were not widely appreciated. Subsequent studies examining the transforming potential of GPCRs led to the discovery that coupling specificity and excess ligand availability were key determinants of the oncogenic activity of wild type GPCRs. Specifically, overexpression alone of muscarinic cholinergic receptors, which span across G A-coupling subtypes, was found to be insufficient to transform NIH3T3 cells. However, in the presence of the agonist carbachol foci were readily induced for G A Q-coupled CHRMs, thereby establishing that wild-type GPCRs can act as agonist-dependent oncogenes based on their G protein coupling capacity. The A one B-adrenergic receptor was found to behave similarly by inducing neoplastic transformation when ectopically expressed in NIH3T3 cells, and triggering formation of foci in an agonist-dependent manner. However, mutation of this receptor eliminated agonist dependency of receptor activation, rendering it constitutively active, thus raising the possibility that mutations may be a mechanism to enhance the oncogenic potential of GPCRs. As time has progressed, massive advances in the field of cancer genomics have transformed our understanding of oncogenesis and drivers of cancer. Aligned with this, GPCRs and heterotrimeric G proteins have emerged as candidate drivers supported by a diverse body of work underscoring the cancer relevance of mutations in GPCRs and heterotrimeric G proteins.


## The Hallmarks of Cancer

The hallmarks of cancer were originally proposed as a conceptual framework to better describe and understand the fundamental underpinnings of neoplastic disease and have since revolutionized our paradigm of the intricate processes driving cancer. Composed of multiple interrelated processes, one, sustaining proliferative signalling, two, evading growth suppressors, three, resisting cell death, four, enabling replicative immortality, five, inducing angiogenesis, six, activating invasion and metastasis, seven, metabolic reprogramming, eight, evading immune destruction, and the enabling characteristics of nine, genome instability and ten, inflammation, this collection of capabilities cooperatively interact to facilitate the transformation of cells, and drive malignant growth and metastasis.

Aimed towards characterizing the unifying features of all cancers irrespective of tumor type, these guiding principles address the complex and dynamic interactions between and within the tumor and the tumor microenvironment, and have grown to encompass the numerous cell types that participate in these interactions, including normal cells whose functions can be co-opted to help drive tumorigenesis. Moreover, the dynamic and interrelated nature of these hallmarks necessitate the coordination of different signalling programs and their associated molecular mechanisms.

The remarkable functional repertoire of GPCRs and heterotrimeric G proteins, and their centrality to numerous cellular and physiological processes make them key participants in facilitating each of these hallmarks. In particular, given the complexity of signal transduction networks controlled by GPCRs, coupled with the cell-context specificity of signal integration and output, it is likely that GPCRs and heterotrimeric G proteins participate in multiple hallmarks within cancer cells and their tumor microenvironment. Specifically, there are likely to be numerous and overlapping mechanisms by which mutations and/or aberrant expression of GPCRs and heterotrimeric G proteins drive proliferative signalling, induce evasion of growth suppressors and enable replicative immortality, which will be described in detail below. The role of GPCRs in the remaining hallmarks will be described under each respective heading.


## GPCRs in Cancer Initiation: Proliferative Signalling, Evasion of Growth Suppressors, and Replicative Immortality

GPCRs and Viral-Associated Cancers

Numerous viruses have evolved to take advantage of the diverse signalling outcomes downstream of GPCRs for their survival and propagation. Together, these mechanisms facilitate viral entry of the host cell, evasion of the host immune response, viral replication, and modulation of host survival pathways in order to promote viral pathogenesis. Several viruses have been found to encode GPCRs in their genomes, including Kaposi's Sarcoma associated herpesvirus, Human cytomegalovirus, Human Herpesvirus six and seven, and Epstein-Barr Virus. These viral GPCRs all encode GPCRs that are distantly related to human chemokine receptors.

In many cases, infections by these viruses can lead to development of viral-associated cancer. For example, KSHV, a gamma two herpesvirus, is the causative agent of Kaposi's sarcoma, most frequently found in immunosuppressed individuals, and a significant driver of mortality among AIDS patients. The KSHV vGPCR is most closely related to human C X C R one and two receptors; however, it possesses several substitutions in residues which confer constitutive activity and enhanced coupling to G proteins. Indeed, expression of KSHV vGPCR is alone sufficient to induce angiosarcomas when expressed in endothelial cells. Studies examining the etiology of Kaposi's sarcoma, have found that vGPCR can initiate Kaposi's sarcomagenesis and contribute to progression of Kaposi's sarcoma lesions. KSHV has also been shown to play key roles in lymphoproliferative disorders, namely primary effusion lymphoma and multicentric Castleman's disease, both of which are B cell lymphomas primarily seen in AIDS patients. Here, vGPCR has been shown to elicit a broad range of signalling and transcriptional events ultimately driving B cell recruitment and hyper-proliferation.

Viruses can also exploit host GPCRs to promote viral pathogenesis and survival by expressing virally encoded GPCR agonists or antagonists in order to modulate host cell signalling. For example, KHSV encodes multiple viral cytokines, which have significant sequence similarity to host chemokine agonists and antagonists and can bind to host GPCRs to mediate functions such as chemotaxis of immune cells, and resistance to apoptosis. Alternatively, these proteins can bind to and inactivate host-produced ligands in order to shut off or abrogate host immune response.


## The Mutation Spectrum of GPCRs in Cancer

The generation of vast cancer sequencing resources including The Cancer Genome Atlas, and the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer have revealed that GPCRs and heterotrimeric G proteins are collectively mutated in roughly twenty percent of all cancers, spanning across numerous tumor types. This is aligned with mutation frequencies of some of the most well-studied cancer-related pathways, including the receptor tyrosine kinase, RAS, MAPK and P fifty-three pathways, which are mutated at forty-six percent and twenty-nine percent of all cancers respectively. Despite this staggering number, the biological function and consequence of many of these GPCR and heterotrimeric G protein mutations are as of yet largely unknown due to the numerous factors that influence the prediction of cancer-driving mutations. For example, the contribution of gene length must be weighed against the number of mutations in a given gene. Coupled with this, many of the mutations in GPCRs are not isolated to hotspot residues, further hindering efforts to predict their signalling and cellular impact and potential role in cancer. As a result, it has been difficult to infer the biological contexts in which mutations in GPCRs have cancer-driving effects as compared to passenger mutations with little functional impact. Towards this end, there have been numerous recent advances in cancer genomics and methodology aimed at identifying significantly mutated genes, and their associated biological consequences. For example, the MutSig suite of tools builds a model based on several characteristics, including the mutation burden of a gene relative to the background mutation rate of each tissue, mutation clustering within a gene and potential hotspots, and the evolutionary conservation of mutations. These features are then integrated to obtain gene-level mutation significance. For our analysis we have included data generated using MutSig two CV, which refines the background mutation rate predictions by incorporating parameters of mutational heterogeneity such as DNA replication timing and transcriptional activity. To complement measurements of mutation significance, other approaches have been used to predict the pathogenicity of mutations in cancer, including investigating phylogenetic conservation, allele frequency, proximity to specific genomic features, mapping mutations to protein domains, and assessing patterns of mutual exclusivity with other mutations. In tandem, the integration of rapidly growing mechanistic data are beginning to shed light on the molecular basis of how cancer-associated mutations may be playing a role, including the systematic mapping of cancer-related alterations on a pathway level.

Of particular relevance to GPCR-driven signalling, structure-function analyses of mutations in GPCRs have begun to provide insight on these observations and a new framework of the functional impact of GPCR mutations is emerging. Projection of cancer-related mutations for T.S.H.R., for example, have revealed an accumulation of mutations clustered at the cytoplasmic tail of helix six, suggesting that in the absence of a physical hotspot mutation, structural motif hotspots may be more prevalent manifestations of cancer-associated GPCR mutations. Indeed, our recent pan-cancer analysis of functional somatic mutations in gene families has demonstrated significant enrichment of mutations in a handful of highly conserved regions of GPCRs that regulate GPCR function and activation. These include mutations localized to the D.R.Y. motif, which mediates the inactive conformation of class A GPCRs, with particular emphasis on recurrent mutations in D.R.Y. arginine, in addition to the N.P.X.X.Y. motif, both of which are critical regulators of GPCR activation. Mutations in these positions show statistically significant mutual exclusivity between motifs, as well as with activating hotspot mutations in the G alpha subunit further supporting the functional significance of these structure-based predictions. D.R.Y. arginine mutations are also mutually exclusive with many common mutant oncogenes that are downstream of GPCR-mediated signalling cascades, including A.K.T. E seventeen K, P.I.K. three C.A. E five forty-five K and J.A.K. two V six seventeen F. In many cases where the full G-protein-coupling repertoire of GPCRs has not been fully elucidated, recent efforts to systematically predict the G protein-coupling selectivity of GPCRs via functional interaction studies have provided novel insights into these coupling determinants and the subsequent implications both from a structural, and signalling perspective. Integration of this information with other data types including aforementioned mutation and structure-function analyses will continue to widen and clarify our view of the impact of cancer-associated mutations in GPCRs.

Broken down phylogenetically, the adhesion and glutamate GPCR are highly mutated families of GPCRs in cancer; however, their role in cancer is not well defined. Adhesion GPCRs are named as such due to the extended extracellular N terminus containing structural domains such as thrombospondin repeats, and leucine-rich-repeats, which participate in a variety of protein-protein interactions and can mediate adhesion to cellular matrix proteins. The adhesion GPCR subfamily is widely mutated among cancer types in The Cancer Genome Atlas and a number of adhesion GPCRs are involved in angiogenesis, metastasis, and other critical components of cancer initiation and progression. Among them, GPR98 ADGRV1 is the most frequently mutated GPCR across all cancer types. In particular ADGRV1 is mutated in roughly forty-five percent of skin cutaneous melanoma, and is the longest GPCR by amino acid length; however, not much is known regarding its functional impact. ADGRE5, also known as CD97, was the first adhesion GPCR to be linked to cancer, as its expression was found to be a sensitive marker of dedifferentiation in thyroid carcinomas. While ADGRE5 expression was nearly absent in normal thyrocytes, its levels increased in correlation with thyroid tumor stage. Its overexpression has since been identified in several other cancer types including pancreatic, gallbladder, and esophageal carcinomas, and is linked to metastatic aggressiveness in gastric, colorectal cancers, and particularly in glioblastoma. Glioblastoma in particular, is known to develop extensive intratumoral hypoxia, and GPR133 ADGRD1 has been implicated to be critical for glioblastoma growth under hypoxic conditions.

Glutamate receptors, which bind glutamate as their ligand, have primarily been studied for their roles in the central nervous system but are becoming increasingly implicated in cancer. A pan-cancer analysis of somatic mutation patterns revealed a number of significantly mutated GPCRs, including GRM eight. In another case, a GPCR-targeted mutation analysis of melanomas revealed that GPR ninety-eight (mentioned above) and GRM three, a metabotropic glutamate receptor, were the most frequently mutated genes. Expression of patient-derived GRM three mutants in melanoma cell lines significantly increased anchorage-independent cell proliferation, as well as cell migration in vitro and in vivo metastatic rate. Similarly, ectopic expression of GRM one and GRM five have been found to induce spontaneous formation of melanoma in transgenic mouse models suggesting a role for GRMs in driving melanoma initiation. Glutamate and other amino acid-binding GPCRs, such as the taste receptors TAS one R one, and TAS one R three, can also act as nutrient sensors that survey the tumor microenvironment and extracellular milieu to assess nutrient availability. Under times of nutrient stress or deprivation, these GPCRs can regulate the activation of autophagic programs that enable cancer cells to persist.

One of the most prominent GPCRs implicated in neoplastic growth is the Thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor. TSHR is coupled primarily to Gas and to a lesser extent Gaq, and is a key regulator of thyroid cell function, growth and hormone metabolism. Mutations in TSHR have been found to lead to numerous thyroid diseases, including hyper- and hypothyroidism and hyperfunctioning thyroid adenomas. Strikingly, activating mutations in TSHR are the predominant cause of solitary toxic thyroid adenomas, accounting for roughly sixty to eighty percent of all cases, and are found in roughly thirty percent of thyroid adenomas among other cancers. Aligned with this, activating mutations in GNAS and TSHR are commonly found in differentiated thyroid carcinomas.

TSHR and other hormone GPCRs, such as G-protein coupled estrogen receptor (also known as GPR thirty), luteinizing hormone receptor, follicle-stimulating hormone receptor, gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor, and their cognate hormone ligands, are known to play multiple roles in modulating the tumor microenvironment and promoting tumor proliferation particularly for cancers with hormonal involvement such as thyroid, breast, ovarian, and prostate cancers. Indeed, prostate cancer induced by injection of testosterone was one of the earliest indications that hormone dynamics could control the initiation of cancer.

Estrogen for example, is a hormone involved in many aspects of normal physiology and has been well-studied in the context of breast and ovarian cancers. Concomitant to the transcriptional actions of classical estrogen receptors, GPER has been shown to mediate both transcriptional and rapid signal transduction events upon estrogen binding, activating the EGFR and MAPK pathways and resulting in the activation of c-fos regulated transcriptional networks in multiple tissue types. Interestingly, GPER has been shown to cooperate with ERa to promote mitogenic effects in a cell-context dependent manner, highlighting the multifaceted nature of estrogen signalling in cancer. Evista, which is FDA approved for the prevention of breast cancer in post-menopausal women, targets ERs, while also modulating GPER activity. Other hormone-binding GPCRs have been successfully targeted in oncology, including the gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor. Degarelix, a well-tolerated GnRH antagonist, has been used for the treatment of advanced prostate cancer by rapidly suppressing levels of gonadotropins, testosterone, and prostate-specific antigen in patients. The profound efficacy of degarelix as a first-line monotherapy for the management of prostate cancer is a remarkable testament to the druggability of GPCRs and their use in oncotherapy.

Another seven-transmembrane receptor frequently mutated in cancer is Smoothened, which drives activation of the transcription factor GLI. SMO is negatively regulated by the twelve-transmembrane receptor patched; however, this inhibition is relieved upon binding of PTCH to hedgehog family members, including sonic hedgehog. Mutations that result in the activation of the PTCH-SMO-SHH signalling axis have been found to drive sporadic basal cell carcinomas. As of yet, the potential role of heterotrimeric G proteins in the signalling capacity of SMO have not been fully clarified. Studies have found that in some cell contexts, Gai and Ga twelve are involved in activation of the pathway; however, the dependency of SMO on G protein coupling for its roles in cancer initiation and progression is not well understood and requires further investigation.

The Frizzled family of seven-transmembrane receptors are also heavily involved in cancer, as transducers of the Wnt signalling cascade. Wnt signalling can drive the activation of several transcriptional networks, primarily beta-catenin and has been described to play a role in numerous cancer types, with emphasis in colorectal cancer. Indeed, the Frizzled family of GPCRs is collectively mutated in greater than fifteen percent of colon adenocarcinomas in TCGA. FZD six in particular is significantly mutated in colon adenocarcinoma (MutSig two CV q-value equals zero point zero five). There is mounting evidence supporting the G protein coupling of Frizzleds as a critical component of the Wnt signalling pathway. For example, inhibition of Goo and Gaq has been found to disrupt Wnt-mediated stabilization of beta-catenin and teratocarcinoma stem-cell

A

differentiation. Future work will likely expand the current view of G protein regulated Wnt signalling in cancer initiation and progression.

While the complexity of the mutational landscape of GPCRs in cancer, which we refer to as the onco-GPCRome, is daunting, some interesting tissue-specific patterns are now emerging that may help explain their direct biological impact. Indeed, recent cross-cancer analysis of GPCR mutations in human malignancies has revealed that gastrointestinal cancers harbor the highest number of mutated GPCRs and heterotrimeric G proteins, irrespective of the mutational load of these cancers. This is coupled with the recent finding that a significant portion of mutated GPCRs couple to G as and G ai/o, more specifically, an enrichment of activating mutants of G as-coupled receptors, and deleterious (inactivating) mutants of G ai/o-coupled receptors. Together, these mutation patterns converge on the oncogenic impact of elevated adenylyl cyclase activity and production of cyclic AMP, which is stimulated by G as and inhibited by G ai/o, suggesting a prominent role for enhanced cAMP signalling in cancer. The cAMP signalling network is involved in different aspects of tumorigenesis, and these findings establish a functional link between the mutation patterns in GPCRs and their candidate role as cell-context specific oncodrivers, with emphasis on gastrointestinal cancers, including colorectal, stomach, and pancreatic adenocarcinomas. GPCRs are also known to possess copy number variation or gene expression alterations, leading to their aberrant expression in numerous cancer types, representing a mutation-independent, and potentially targetable mechanism by which they can drive oncogenic signalling networks. Indeed, twenty-eight out of thirty-three TCGA cancer cohorts have been found to have CNVs in GPCR and heterotrimeric G protein genes that are significantly correlated with the mRNA expression patterns of each respective gene. The tissue, cell type, and even tumor stage-specific nature of these alterations further emphasize the complex and dynamic molecular forces underlying GPCR signalling in cancer. These mechanisms can contribute to diverse aspects of tumorigenesis, which will be discussed in greater detail below.

In contrast to the pro-tumorigenic role of many GPCRs, GPCR-driven signalling has in some cases, been shown to play a tumor suppressive role, highlighting the complexity and the cell-context dependency of these signalling events. This is highly aligned with tumor suppressive roles for heterotrimeric G proteins in certain contexts as well. For example, inactivation of Ga-thirteen signalling, either by inactivating mutations in the Ga-thirteen-coupled Sphingosine-one-phosphate receptor two, or in Ga-thirteen itself have both been identified to enhance tumor progression in diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Moreover, the Kisspeptin receptor has been widely implicated as a metastatic suppressor in numerous cancer types. Similarly, GPR68 was first found to be a metastatic suppressor in prostate cancer and was found to be significantly downregulated in metastatic tumors; however, further work has shown that GPR68 is highly upregulated in pancreatic cancer-associated fibroblasts and represents an emerging drug target in this cancer type (Figure one). In another case, targeting of dopamine receptors in cancer has been shown to have highly tumor-type specific effects, where both activation and antagonism have been found to have anti-tumor effects. However, in the particular case of glioblastoma, targeting of the dopamine receptor DRD-two has shown to be a highly promising drug target, with the compound ONC-two-zero-one being investigated in clinical trials. Finally, ADGRB-one-three, also known as the BAI family GPCRs, are silenced or mutated in numerous cancer types (Figure one). See below (GPCRs and Genome Instability) for more details on the effect of BAI-one loss on genomic instability.


## Mutations in heterotrimeric G Proteins in Cancer

The unanticipatedly high frequency of mutations in GPCRs coupled with their complex expression and mutation patterns in different cancer types highlight the previously underappreciated role of GPCR signalling in cancer. Detailed work on the functional impact of GPCRs in cancer, exploiting novel computational biology pipelines, structure-function predictions, and functional analyses of the impact of cancer-associated mutations in GPCRs will contribute to establishing GPCRs as cancer-specific drivers. In contrast, the presence of hotspot mutations in heterotrimeric G proteins defines them as driver oncogenes in specific cancer types. Here we will summarize the role of heterotrimeric G proteins in cancer and as cancer drivers.


## Signalling through Gaq G proteins- The GNAQ oncogenes

The Gaq family of heterotrimeric subunits, encoded by GNAQ, GNA-eleven, GNA-fourteen and GNA-fifteen, and their coupled receptors, are responsible for transducing many of the mitogenic signals initiated by growth factors acting on GPCRs. Members of the Gaq family activate phospholipase-C-beta, which cleaves PIP-two into diacylglycerol and inositol one-four-five triphosphate. Generation of these second messengers triggers the mobilization of cytosolic calcium and all together, elicit the activation of numerous downstream signalling events via regulated kinases and transcriptional networks. Mutation of the Gaq subunit into a GTPase defective, constitutively active conformation was originally modelled based on previous studies examining mutations in the ras oncogene. These Gaq mutants induced malignant transformation in NIH-threeT-three cells and were found to be tumorigenic in nude mice.

Since this original discovery, aberrant Gaq activity has been found to be involved in diverse pathological conditions including congenital hemangiomas, leptomeningeal melanocytic lesions, Sturge Weber syndrome, and recent cancer sequencing efforts revealed that GNAQ and GNA-eleven are significantly mutated in uveal melanomas. More specifically, activating mutations in Gaq or Ga-eleven, predominantly at Q-two-zero-nine, are collectively found in greater than ninety percent of uveal melanomas where they act as driver oncogenes. The Gaq family is also mutated in roughly ten percent of skin cutaneous melanomas. Uveal melanoma is the primary cancer of the eye in adults, affecting roughly two thousand five hundred patients in the United States each year. Nearly five percent of uveal melanoma patients who lack mutation in Gaq or Ga-eleven, possess mutually exclusive activating mutations in other levels of the Gaq pathway, including in CYSLTR-two, a Gaq-coupled GPCR, or PLC-beta-four, a downstream effector of Gaq, firmly establishing hyper-activation of the Gaq-pathway as the oncogenic driver of uveal melanoma. Uveal melanoma caused by mutation and hyperactivation of CYSLTR-two remains one of the most striking examples of a GPCR-driven cancer type to date (Figure one).

Studies investigating the mechanisms by which aberrant Gaq signalling drives tumorigenesis have revealed that compared to the transient stimulation of second messengers and mitogenic kinases after canonical Gaq stimulation, mutant Gaq requires a protein-protein interaction with the Rho-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factor TRIO in order to sustain persistent signalling. In in vivo uveal melanoma models, knockdown of TRIO phenocopies reduction of Gaq expression based on cell proliferation assays, tumorigenic potential as well as activation of JNK, p-thirty-eight and AP-one-mediated transcription. Remarkably, this signalling circuitry was independent of PLC-beta, the best-known target of Gaq and led to the activation of YAP, a transcriptional co-activator regulated by the Hippo pathway. The Hippo pathway is a tumor suppressive pathway, broadly involved in cell proliferation and organ size control, and has been found to be frequently altered in cancer. In uveal melanoma, YAP activity was demonstrated to be necessary for tumor growth and proliferation. Recently studies have shown that Focal Adhesion Kinase, is a central mediator of the Gaq-driven oncogenic signalling circuitry by controlling the activation of YAP, thereby representing a potential therapeutic target for patients with uveal melanoma.

Mutations in Gaq/eleven at residue R-one-eight-three, the second most commonly mutated site in GNAQ have been found to cause Sturge-Weber Syndrome, a neurocutaneous disorder characterized by facial port-wine stains and ipsilateral occipital leptomeningeal angiomas, and are also sometimes found in uveal melanoma patients (Figure two A,B). Similar to Q-two-zero-nine, R-one-eight-three is located in the GTP-binding region of

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved

Gaq, whereby mutation interferes with the intrinsic GTPase activity and increases signalling activity; however, mutations at R-one-eight-three have been found to be less potently activating than Q-two-zero-nine mutants. Activating Gaq mutants have also been associated with congenital hemangiomas, and frequently found in a subset of other melanocytic neoplasms, including blue nevi, nevi of Ota, and primary melanocytic tumors of the central nervous system.

Gaq has also been found to play diverse roles in the immune system, where Gaq has been implicated to have a tumor suppressive role. Loss of GNAQ expression enhances both B and T cell proliferation in vivo and survival in vitro. Strikingly, alteration of the Gaq pathway by loss of Gaq expression or recurrent loss of function mutations at T ninety-six S or Y one hundred one, are found in roughly twenty-five percent of natural killer/T cell lymphoma, a malignant and highly aggressive subtype of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Consistent with the impact of Gaq loss in other immune cells, NK-specific knockout of Gaq in mice imparted an intrinsic survival advantage of NK cells as compared to wild type NK cells. Moreover, expression of WT Gaq in Gaq-low NK cell lines promoted apoptosis, which could be ablated by concomitant expression of T ninety-six S Gaq suggesting T ninety-six S Gaq acts as a dominant negative mutant to promote NK cell tumorigenicity. The proclivity of R one hundred eighty-three and Q two hundred nine hotspot mutations in Gaq to solid tumors compared to the incidence of T ninety-six and Y one hundred one in hematopoietic malignancies suggests a complex relationship between the oncogenic or tumor suppressive function of these mutations and the cell context in which they originate, highlighting the complex molecular events underlying Gaq-driven oncogenic signalling.


## Signalling through Gas in cancer- The GNAS oncogene

GNAS, encoding the Gas protein, is among the most frequently mutated G proteins in human cancer. Mutation characterization across tumor types has revealed that GNAS is mutated in approximately five percent of sequenced tumors, enriched in appendix cancers (seventy percent), pituitary tumors (twenty-seven percent). Across TCGA, GNAS is most frequently mutated in endometrial carcinomas (seven point three percent), stomach adenocarcinomas (five point seven percent), adrenocortical carcinomas (five point five percent), pancreatic adenocarcinomas (five point six percent), esophageal carcinomas (four point nine percent) and colorectal cancers (four point seven percent). The majority of Gas mutations occur at a hotspot residue (R two hundred one), resulting in expression of a constitutively active, GTPase defective form of the Gas protein. A secondary hotspot can be found at Q two hundred twenty-seven but is less prevalent than R two hundred one mutants. The functional significance of the R two hundred one residue was first suggested from studies examining the mechanism of action of cholera toxin. It was revealed that cholera toxin ADP-ribosylates R two hundred one of Gas, irreversibly inhibiting its GTPase activity, and resulting in its activation. Crystallographic studies of Gas have since confirmed that the R two hundred one residue lies in its GTP-binding pocket and facilitates GTP hydrolysis.

Activation of Gas, either by stimulation of Gas-coupled GPCRs or by activating mutations, stimulates adenylyl cyclases, which leads to the production of cAMP and activation of protein kinase A and subsequent signalling events. The tumorigenic effects of Gas were first demonstrated in a subset of growth hormone-secreting pituitary tumors harbouring R two hundred one C/H mutations. In these tumors, persistent signalling driven by mutant Gas bypassed the canonical requirement for stimulation by growth hormone, resulting in hormone-insensitive growth. Indeed, the Gas subfamily is mutated in nearly seven percent of adrenocortical carcinomas in TCGA. Activation of the Gas pathway has been shown to cause numerous other syndromes with involvement of endocrine dysfunction including McCune-Albright syndrome, which is also characterized by fibrous dysplasia of the bone, in addition to Cushing's syndrome, Carney complex, and micronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia.

Strikingly, our recent study found that there is widespread activation of the Gas pathway across a large proportion of cancer types in TCGA with a remarkable enrichment in cancers of the gastrointestinal tract. Consistent with this, the Gas subfamily is mutated in five point two four percent of colorectal, five point zero three percent of pancreatic and five point nine six percent of stomach adenocarcinomas. Indeed, both GNAS and GNAL are significantly mutated in pancreatic adenocarcinoma (MutSig2CV q-values equals nine point five six times ten raised to negative four, and one point seven seven times ten raised to negative two respectively). Remarkably, greater than fifty percent of colorectal cancer patients have aberrant activation of the Gs pathway, including activating mutation or gene amplification of GNAS, or in downstream effectors of Gas including protein kinase A, and adenylyl cyclases, as well as by the activation of prostaglandin E2 receptors, which are coupled to Gs, by inflammatory prostaglandins accumulating locally due to COX2 overexpression. These genetic alterations and autocrine activation play a central role in the deregulation and activation of the PKA, Wnt and MAPK pathways in the intestinal epithelium and are likely to contribute to tumorigenesis and colorectal cancer progression.

Interestingly, many Gas mutant cancers have been found to be highly mucinous. Aligned with this, GNAS expression has been found to induce expression of mucin genes. In particular, GNAS mutations are highly prevalent in gastrointestinal mucinous neoplasms, including intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms, an invasive pancreatic cystic neoplasm that can advance to pancreatic adenocarcinoma, as well as appendiceal mucinous tumors where signalling driven by Gas has been found to play a critical role.

Gas, and Gas-driven signalling also plays a critical role in stem cell populations, where it has been found to suppress self-renewal. In contrast to the pro-oncogenic effects of GOF mutations in Gas, in some stem-like cell states, Gas has a tumor suppressive role where LOF mutations, or Gas deletion has been found to drive tumor initiation and progression by de-repression of the Sonic Hedgehog and Hippo pathways. In particular, the loss of GNAS, or low Gas expression is tightly linked to poor overall survival in a subset of aggressive medulloblastomas with alterations and activation of SHH signalling, and in neuroblastoma. Strikingly, deletion of GNAS in neural stem/progenitor cells consistently leads to medulloblastoma-like tumors in mice by derepressing SHH signalling thus contributing to the development and malignancy of SHH-associated medulloblastoma tumors. In epidermal and hair follicle progenitor cell populations, conditional deletion of Gas leads to rapid formation of basal cell carcinoma by repressing PKA-mediated inhibition of SHH and YAP signalling. Of note, activation of Gas in epithelial stem cells leads to exhaustion of hair follicle stem cells and subsequent hair loss, demonstrating the cell-context specific impact of Gas signalling.


## Mutations in genes encoding Gai/o proteins in cancer

Pente

The Gai/o subfamily of G proteins elicit signalling through a broad range of effectors, including activation of MAPK and PI3K signalling. In opposition to Gas signalling, Gai inhibits adenylyl cyclase, leading to a decrease in cyclic AMP. This was originally discovered through studies examining the mechanism of action of Islet Activating protein, also known as pertussis toxin, as it was isolated from Bordetella pertussis. Islet Activating Protein was found to release inhibition of adenylyl cyclase and enhance receptor mediated cAMP generation. Multiple groups studying the substrate of Islet Activating Protein found that Islet Activating Protein ADP-ribosylated Gai, thereby inactivating it, and enhancing adenylyl cyclase activity. Similar to other G proteins, constitutively active mutants of Gai have been shown to possess the ability to transform cells and are known proto-oncogenes. Cancer derived activated mutants of GNAO1, encoding Gao, have also been found to promote oncogenic transformation and anchorage-dependent growth when expressed in cells.

In particular, hotspot activating mutations in GNAI2, which has been termed as the gip two oncogene, has been found in several tumor types, including ovarian and adrenal tumors, and has been shown to underlie a dysfunctional state in a subset of growth hormone-secreting pituitary adenomas; however the small number of patients with this particular disorder have limited efforts to study the effect of germline GNAI variants and warrant further investigation. Strikingly, GNAI2 is in the top one per cent of copy number gains in brain, central nervous system, and kidney cancers suggesting there could be a larger role for Gai-driven signalling. In particular, many G protein coupled receptors that are well established as drivers of metastasis, such as CXCR4 (see below) couple to Gai. Aligned with this, GNAI2, encoding Gai two, has been found to be highly amplified in breast invasive carcinoma.

rtic Remarkably, Gai/o-coupled receptors are the most commonly deleteriously mutated class of G protein coupled receptors across cancers. Coupled with this, inactivating mutations in Gai/o coupled receptors have been found to be mutually exclusive with activating mutations in Gas, suggesting that they lead to the same functional outcomes, converging on increased cyclic AMP activity. Indeed, a large subset of G protein coupled receptors mutated in GI-tract cancers are Gai coupled, and the Gai/o subfamily of G proteins are altered at similar frequencies in GI cancers to the Gas subfamily; however, the functional significance of their mutations have not yet been comprehensively tested. Aligned with the recurrent incidence of Gas-pathway activation in GI cancers, upregulated cAMP/PKA activity may be a common mechanism of tumorigenesis in these tissue types, and warrants further investigation, both from a signalling and clinical perspective.


## Mutations in genes encoding Ga twelve proteins in cancer

The Ga twelve subfamily of G proteins is comprised of two a subunits, encoded by GNA12 and GNA13. Expressed in almost every tissue type, Ga twelve and Ga thirteen play critical roles in cell proliferation and cytoskeletal remodelling, including cell polarity, cell adhesion, migration, and invasion. The Ga twelve/thirteen subunits were originally discovered based on their amino acid sequence similarity to other Ga subunits and determined to be unique based on their insensitivity to pertussis toxin. Wild-type Ga twelve was identified from a sarcoma-derived cDNA library screen to cause transformation of NIH3T3 cells, representing the only G protein subfamily whose overexpression is sufficient to be transformative without mutation. The transforming ability of wild-type Ga twelve was found to be dependent on the presence of serum; however, mutation of GNA twelve leading to expression of an activated, GTPase deficient Ga twelve was found to be potently transforming, and eliminated serum-dependence for transformation. Similar work demonstrating the potent transforming activity of Ga thirteen led to the designation of GNA twelve and GNA thirteen active mutants collectively referred to as the gep oncogene.

Ga twelve/thirteen have since been widely explored as drivers of cellular transformation, cancer progression and metastatic potential in a variety of cell types. Signalling driven by Ga twelve/thirteen is largely mediated via the RhoGEF family, including p one one five RhoGEF, PDZ-RhoGEF and Leukemia- associated RhoGEF to mediate signalling to Rho. Initial studies on the mechanism by which active mutant of Go twelve was fully transforming in fibroblasts demonstrated that Ga twelve strongly stimulated transcriptional activity through the c-fos promoter element and the serum response element, which was dependent on Rho. Further work has revealed that Ga twelve/thirteen can signal through multiple effectors including beta-catenin, Radixin, and MAPK among others. All together, these signalling pathways regulate a diversity of cancer-related transcriptional networks and cellular functions, including the activation of AP-one, STAT three, and YAP.

pag

Induction of aberrant Ga twelve/thirteen driven signalling by overexpression or mutation of Ga twelve/thirteen or of Ga twelve/thirteen coupled G protein coupled receptors such as protease activated receptor one PAR-one, or thromboxane A two receptor TA two R, have been shown to be transforming, and significantly increase the invasive ability of different cancer types. Of interest, Ga twelve/thirteen, Ga twelve/thirteen-coupled G protein coupled receptors and their effectors including Rho, are overexpressed in several cancer types including breast, prostate, and hepatocellular carcinomas. In particular, GNA thirteen is upregulated in several solid tumors and its expression levels have been found to modulate drug resistance in squamous cell cancers, such as head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. GNA twelve also exhibits significant copy number gain in ovarian cancer, which is a cancer type characterized by generally few driver mutations.

conted It is well established that several receptors for bioactive lipids including LPAR and S one P R, and chemokine receptors including C X C R four can couple to G A twelve and thirteen and are involved in the metastatic potential of cancers. Either overexpression of these receptors, or their cognate ligands can create an oncocrine feed forward loop promoting proliferation and migration of cancer cells. Consistent with this, blockade of G A twelve signalling using breast cancer mouse models has been found to significantly reduce the metastatic ability of four T one mouse breast cancer cells, and significantly increase the metastasis-free survival of mice.

Interestingly, the G A thirteen Rho A signalling axis has been found to have a tumor-suppressive role in a wide range of hematopoietic and lymphoid malignancies including Burkitt's lymphoma, and Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma. COSMIC analyses have revealed that G N A thirteen,

and its downstream effector Rho A are significantly mutated in these cancer types with mutations distributed across the gene body as compared to easily recognizable hotspot mutations, which tend to be activating in nature. Across T C G A PanCancer studies, G N A thirteen appears to have a potential hotspot mutation at R two hundred, although it has not been formally tested and annotated as such by OncoKB. This cluster of mutations appears exclusively in bladder urothelial carcinomas, where G N A thirteen is significantly mutated; however, the function is currently unknown. G A twelve and thirteen has been well-studied in the context of Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma where it is mutated in seven point three two percent of patients in T C G A. In particular, G N A thirteen is the most frequently mutated gene in germinal center derived B-Cell lymphomas, caused by aberrant expansion and dissemination of a subset of B cells that are highly regulated and tightly confined to germinal centers in lymphoid tissues. Mutations in upstream effectors, including the G A twelve and thirteen coupled including Sphingosine-one-phosphate-receptor- two, and P two R Y eight, a putative G A twelve and thirteen-coupling orphan G P C R, or in downstream effectors, including A R H G E F one have also been found.

Indeed, functional characterization of the most commonly detected G A thirteen, Rho A, and lymphoma associated S one P R two mutants showed significantly reduced signalling and downstream transcriptional activity, which could be rescued by expression of wild-type proteins in vitro and in vivo. The mechanism by which inactivation of the G A thirteen signalling pathway promotes development of lymphoma has not been fully characterized; however, several studies have found that suppression of the G A thirteen Rho A axis leads to an increase in phosphorylated-A K T in B cells. Consistent with this, elevated p A K T levels can be detected in immunohistochemistry of Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma tumors, and high p A K T is associated with poor survival in Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma patients, suggesting that targeting the P I three K A K T pathway may be a viable treatment option for patients with G A thirteen loss.


## Mutations affecting G B and R G S signalling in cancer

Functional participants of G protein signalling, including Regulator of G protein Signalling family proteins and B Y subunits of the heterotrimeric G proteins can also play pro-oncogenic roles by modulating or potentiating G protein-driven signalling. R G S family proteins are physiological inhibitors of G proteins through their intrinsic G T P ase-accelerating protein activity, enhancing G T P hydrolysis by the G A-subunit, and promoting the reassembly and deactivation of the heterotrimeric G protein complex. Recent pan-cancer analyses have revealed transcriptomic dysregulation and hundreds of mutations in R G S proteins, enriched for those leading to loss of function, thereby promoting G protein activity via a previously unanticipated tumor suppressive role, and mechanism of G protein signalling potentiation. For example, R G S seven is recurrently mutated in approximately thirteen percent of melanomas, where it promotes anchorage-independent growth, migration and invasion. Similarly, a close homolog R G S six, has been found to possess tumor suppressive functions in breast and bladder cancers.

Currently, five G B subunits and twelve G Y subunits have been described, which can dimerize in numerous unique B Y combinations. Once activated by G T P binding, the G A subunit dissociates from G B Y dimers, enabling G B Y dimers to regulate distinct signalling axes including the P I three K A K T and M A P K pathways. Recurrent, activating mutations in G B proteins, G N B one and G N B two have been discovered in multiple cancers, namely in haematological malignancies where they induce aberrant activation of P I three K A K T and M A P K pathways. Strikingly, expression of patient-derived G N B one mutants were found to be transforming in vivo by induction of myeloid and B cell malignancies in mouse models. Of note, distinct mutations tend to cluster within cancer types based on cell lineage, suggesting that there may be lineage-dependent cellular predispositions determining the impact of specific G B mutations.

G B Y subunits have been also been found to drive cell migration and metastasis. Along with P I P three, G B Y can directly bind to and synergistically activate the guanine-nucleotide exchange factor PREX one, which is a stimulator of the small G T P ase R A C. In addition, G B Y have been found to activate different P I three K isoforms, primarily P I three K beta and P I three K gamma, through interaction with both p one ten and p one zero one catalytic subunits of P I three K to transduce signalling. Of note, expression of G B Y has been shown to be necessary for the transforming capacity of P I three K beta, where binding-defective p one ten mutants have been demonstrated to significantly attenuate the transforming potential and G P C R driven chemotaxis of cells. In line with these findings, expression of this mutant in breast cancer cells significantly inhibited extravasation, matrix-degradation and macrophage-stimulated invasion of tumor cells, highlighting the potential role of G B Y in paracrine signalling between tumor and immune cells. In this context, there is an emerging body of literature demonstrating the importance of G B Y signalling in tumorigenesis and metastasis of cancer, in part by modulation and promotion of a pro-metastatic tumor microenvironment.


## G P C Rs and Cancer Immune Evasion

The immune system is intricately linked to cancer initiation and progression, and as such, cancer immunotherapy is now one of the fastest growing areas of translational and clinical research for cancer treatment. Indeed, the functional roles of G P C Rs in inflammation, cell trafficking, and the diversity of ligands they bind, establish G P C Rs as major regulators of the tumor-immune microenvironment.

Chemokine receptors were initially discovered in the context of immune cell migration, where expression of chemokines in different tissues and/or in response to infection and tissue injury act to direct and recruit a diverse range of innate and adaptive immune cells. This process can be hijacked by cancer cells that express chemokines such as CCL seventeen, CCL twenty-two and others, to attract immunosuppressive immune cells including T-regulatory cells (Tregs), which specifically express the respective receptor CCR four, to promote a tumor permissive environment and dampen immune recognition. This can create a potent feed-forward control system where immune suppressive cells, such as myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), which are recruited by a host of chemokines such as CXCL eight, CXCL one, and CCL two, can further inhibit T cell activation and migration to the tumor. Together, these processes can polarize macrophages, to the M two, or tumor associated macrophage (TAM) phenotype, further dampening the tumor- immune microenvironment.

In tandem, the infiltration of cytotoxic immune cells providing an anti-tumor response is also dependent on a repertoire of chemokines and chemokine receptors. The infiltration of CD eight positive T cells and natural killer (NK) cells has been shown to have high prognostic value and it is mainly guided by CXCR three, which binds the CXCL nine and CXCL ten ligands in the tumor microenvironment. Additionally, conventional dendritic cells (cDCs), namely, Batf three positive cDC ones, have been shown to be the main DC subtype responsible for taking up dead tumor cells and cross-prime T cells, and their function largely depends on trafficking to the tumor by XCR one. The exclusivity of XCR one expression on cDC ones may make it an ideal target for boosting the dendritic cell antigen presentation response.

Many by-products of tumor cell metabolism are ligands that bind GPCRs, suggesting that they may also dictate the success of cancer immunotherapies. More specifically, studies have shown that lipid compounds, nucleosides (adenosine), and prostaglandins, some of the main products of ATP breakdown and inflammation, bind GPCRs to suppress cytotoxic function of immune cells. As our understanding of normal and aberrant GPCR signalling deepens, assessing levels of bioactive GPCR ligands, in addition to chemokine and chemokine receptor expression could also help guide clinical strategies. For example, increased CXCL nine, CXCL ten and CXCL eleven are associated with improved survival, and are part of an interferon-induced gene expression profile that has been used as a clinical-grade assay to predict favourable responses to PD one blockade.

Tumor-immune interactions are increasingly becoming the target of therapeutic agents intended to break the cross-talk that enables cancer progression. Currently, there are several therapeutics targeting chemokine receptors such CXCR four, CCR two and CCR four, and the adenosine-binding A two A R receptor (ADORA two A) being explored for the treatment of cancer. For example, mogamulizumab, an FDA-approved monoclonal antibody targeting CCR four is being used for the treatment of lymphomas as monotherapy and is being tested in combination with other treatments. Targeting GPCRs for their immunomodulatory functions in cancer present an exciting and promising field that has the potential to revolutionize how cancer is treated in the future.


## GPCRs and Tumor Promoting Inflammation

Chronic inflammation has been consistently linked to cancer. In particular, prostaglandins (PG) and specifically prostaglandin E two (PGE two) are key mediators of inflammation, generated by cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes from arachidonic acid. Binding of PGE two to their cognate GPCRs, EP one through four (PTGER one through four), induces inflammatory responses tightly linking GPCR-driven signalling to inflammation that is well established to contribute to tumor development and progression. COX two mediated production of PGs, in particular PGE two has been found to promote tumorigenesis in a broad range of cancer types, with a prominent role in gastrointestinal cancers. In the context of colorectal cancer, increased expression of PGE two has been found to drive polyp formation, proliferation and cell motility. This has been suggested in part, to be due to PGE two-driven activation of beta-catenin, which may synergize with APC inactivation commonly found in colon cancer. COX two and PGE two driven expression of pro-angiogenic chemokines can further enhance the tumor growth and progression. Chronic inflammation, via COX two overexpression, can also lead to immune suppression and promote tumor growth.

Overexpression of COX two itself has been shown to be sufficient to induce tumorigenesis and invasiveness in various models. Conversely, there is strong epidemiological data linking decreased mortality for colorectal carcinoma patients taking NSAIDs, which are inhibitors of both COX one and COX two. Aligned with this, COX inhibitors are being explored in multiple human clinical trials for cancer prevention and as an adjuvant therapy, and have shown promising results in colorectal cancer and other cancer types.


## GPCRs and Cancer Metastasis

Migration and metastasis of cancer cells are highly coordinated processes that are tightly regulated by numerous signalling and transcriptional events. Signalling through G protein- coupled chemokine receptors is central to many of these processes and consequently, has been widely implicated in driving several aspects of cancer metastasis. Upon binding of their chemokine ligands, chemokine receptors (CXCRs) can stimulate interaction, migration and trafficking of both immune and cancer cells within and between tissues in the body. Both chemokines and bioactive lipids can also induce the secretion of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) by tumor and immune cells to facilitate tumor cell extravasation.

Chemokine receptor-ligand dynamics locally within the tumor microenvironment and more broadly, in a systemic fashion can strongly influence tumor behaviour. These dynamics can drive dysregulated autocrine and paracrine signaling loops in cancer collectively referred to as oncocrine signaling. Interestingly, chemokine receptors and ligands are often aberrantly expressed at common sites of metastasis, driving tissue tropism during metastatic spread. This has been well studied in the context of breast cancer, where it has been found that the chemokine receptors CXCR four and CCR seven are overexpressed. Interestingly, their respective ligands, CXCL twelve/SDF-one and CCL twenty-one are highly expressed in the main sites of breast cancer metastasis, such as bone marrow and lung, driving the metastatic profile of this cancer. Indeed, CXCR four/SDF-one signaling has been found to potently drive breast cancer migration and metastasis. This signaling axis is so potent that tumoral expression of CCR seven is one of the most prominent predictors of metastasis and poor prognosis in several different cancer types. Numerous other chemokine and chemokine receptor dynamics have been found to impact metastasis in different settings, including CCR nine, CCR ten, and CXCR five, in addition to playing complementary and significant roles in driving inflammation in the tumor microenvironment.

Targeting CXCR four/SDF-one signaling using pharmacological inhibitors such as plerixafor, which is an FDA approved CXCR four antagonist for the treatment of patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and multiple myeloma, has shown to be effective in numerous cancer types, supporting the therapeutic potential of targeting this signaling axis. In addition to the well-established role for CXCRs in metastasis, other classes of GPCRs have also been extensively shown to act as metastatic drivers, including PARs, LPAR, and S one PRs, and this list will likely expand as we gain a better understanding of GPCR-driven signaling networks.

Concomitant with this, there is mounting evidence supporting the role of GPCRs as mediators of the oncocrine signaling networks driving tumor growth and neural innervation, particularly in prostate and stomach cancers. For example, activation of the beta-two adrenergic receptor by adrenaline and noradrenaline has been found to promote secretion of nerve growth factor by both cancerous and pre-cancerous cells. Release of nerve growth factor and other neurotrophins potently promote axonogenesis and subsequent tumor innervation, which establishes a paracrine signaling axis via the secretion of noradrenaline by nerves in the tumor microenvironment. This creates a dynamic feed-forward signaling mechanism by acting on cancer cells, in turn, stimulating their growth, promoting resistance to therapy, and reinforcing the expression of nerve growth factor. The autocrine activation of muscarinic receptors is a similar oncocrine signaling axis in prostate and other cancers. Enhanced secretion of acetylcholine leads to aberrant activation of the M three muscarinic receptor, which has been shown to drive cancer cell proliferation and migration. Aligned with this, amplification or gain of the M one and M three muscarinic receptors have recently been found to correlate with worse progression free survival in prostate cancer patients, and is more frequent in castration-resistant prostate cancers, which are significantly more challenging to treat compared to hormone-sensitive tumors. Strikingly, activation of M one and M three signaling has recently been found to induce castration-resistant growth of prostate cancer cells, through the activation of a conserved FAK-YAP signaling axis. Pharmacological inhibition of FAK was found to prevent YAP activation and castration-resistant growth, representing a promising therapeutic strategy against innervation-driven castration-resistance growth of prostate cancer.


## GPCRs and Tumor Angiogenesis

Stimulation of angiogenesis is a key component of cancer progression for solid tumors. Angiogenic factors released by the tumor, including prostaglandins and thrombin, often act on GPCRs in the stroma and surrounding endothelial cells, such as S one PR, PAR one, and CXCR four-seven, to trigger stimulation of angiogenic mediators such as vascular endothelial growth factor and basic fibroblast growth factor. Thrombin-mediated stimulation of PAR two, for example, induces expression and release of vascular endothelial growth factor, increased vascular permeability, and cleavage of fibrinogen to create a favourable environment for vascularization. EP three stimulation on endothelial cells in particular, can stimulate production of matrix metalloproteinases, which degrade extracellular matrix proteins, enabling neovascularization. Release of chemokines such as CCL two, CCL three, and CCL five can act similarly on the stroma in addition to recruiting immune cells to drive angiogenic growth.

In particular, interleukin eight, encoded by CXCL eight and known to bind CXCR one and CXCR two, is a potent pro-angiogenic and pro-inflammatory chemokine that can be released from the tumor, the stroma, and from neutrophils, which together can create a robust feed-forward mechanism to elicit angiogenesis.

These dynamics are typically fine-tuned processes with robust responses induced by minute expression of signaling factors. As such, it is no surprise that tumor cells must co-opt these complex signaling networks to stimulate vascularization and drive cancer progression. Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor treatment using the monoclonal antibody bevacizumab is commonly incorporated into cancer treatment approaches. Moreover, co-targeting the apelin receptor APLNR in addition to vascular endothelial growth factor blockade has shown to be a promising strategy to improve antiangiogenic therapies, particularly in glioblastoma, where APLNR has been shown to have a proangiogenic role. The dependency of tumors on vascularization, and the centrality of GPCRs to several aspects of angiogenesis have made them an attractive target for the cancer therapy toolbox. Inhibition of PAR one, CXCR two, CXCR four, and angiotensin receptors AGTR one and AGTR two have shown promising results and are all under current investigation as antiangiogenic cancer therapeutics. Targeting GPCRs in combination with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor drugs may be an effective strategy to extend the clinical efficacy of each treatment alone by preventing the development of drug resistance and bridging the gap for patients with refractory cancer types.


## GPCRs and Genome Instability

DNA damage and repair mechanisms underly the ability of cells to acquire genetic alterations that can drive cancer initiation and progression. One exciting emerging field suggests that GPCRs and their regulated signalling systems can functionally participate in DNA damage response and repair systems. Lysophosphatidic acid, for example, has been shown to mediate enhanced survival and mitigate chemotherapeutic and radiation-induced DNA damage in the intestinal epithelium via engagement of LPA one and LPA two receptors. LPA two in particular has a potent pro-survival effect against gastrointestinal radiation-induced injury by regulating DNA damage response and repair pathways (Figure one). Damage to the intestinal epithelium is a frequent and dose-limiting complication of common chemo- and radio-therapies. While exogenous LPA is rapidly processed and metabolized in the gastrointestinal tract limiting its activity, synthetic and metabolically stable LPA mimetics may be used as protective agents to promote gastrointestinal integrity during chemo- and radio-therapy.

CXCR four, best-studied for its role in metastasis and modulation of the tumor microenvironment, has also been found to regulate cell survival in ovarian cancer. Blockade of CXCR four with a small peptide antagonist was not only found to inhibit metastasis but induced ovarian cancer cell death by weakening DNA damage checkpoints and leading to mitotic catastrophe. The CXCR four CXCL twelve signaling axis has also been shown to protect hematopoietic stem cells from oxidative stress injury by reducing mitochondrial reactive oxidative species and subsequent genotoxic stress.

Chronic stress is another mechanism that has been linked to development of numerous pathological conditions including cardiovascular disease, inflammation, immunosuppression, and tumorigenesis, due in part to the persistent release of stress hormones and catecholamines. Intriguingly, the chronic activation of Gas-coupled beta two-adrenoreceptors by beta-adrenergic catecholamines has been found to trigger DNA damage, which may underlie some of these effects. Specifically, recruitment and activation of beta-arrestin-one by activated beta two-adrenoreceptors was found to facilitate the AKT-mediated activation of MDM two. Concomitant with the function of beta-arrestin-one as a molecular scaffold facilitating the binding of MDM two to P fifty-three, this molecular mechanism altogether leads to the suppression of P fifty-three levels and subsequent accumulation of DNA damage. This finding coupled with observations that activation of the Gas PKA signaling axis can lead to DNA damage via the generation of reactive oxidative species, highlights the complex interrelationship between GPCR, G-protein and beta-arrestin-mediated cellular dynamics controlling DNA damage and integrity.

enter

The tumor suppressive capacity of GPCRs has also been linked to DNA protective effects. For example, inactivating polymorphisms in the melanocortin one receptor, MCR one, have been found to promote melanoma through an ultraviolet radiation independent mechanism. Indeed, disruptive germline variant alleles in the MCR one gene, collectively referred to as R alleles, are associated with significantly increased somatic mutation burden in melanoma. Aligned with this, activation of MCR one by alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone has an antioxidant effect by promoting the phosphorylation and stabilization of P fifty-three, and an increase in expression of base excision repair enzymes. In another case, ADGR B one, also known as BAI one, has been found to have potent antiangiogenic and antitumorigenic functions, particularly in brain tumors. Strikingly, BAI one has been shown to prevent MDM two-mediated P fifty-three degradation, and BAI one loss leads to a significant decrease in P fifty-three levels. The protective effect of BAI one on P fifty-three degradation is a remarkable illustration of the diverse roles that GPCRs can play in tumorigenesis.

A


## GPCRs and Cell Death Resistance

Parallel to driving cancer initiation, GPCR and G-protein-driven signaling has been found to contribute to resistance to cell death, particularly driving chemoresistance in a broad range of cancers. One of the most outstanding examples has been in BCC, which are driven by overactive hedgehog signaling through the SMO GPCR. Vismodegib, is an FDA-approved SMO inhibitor that is used in the treatment of advanced BCC; however, acquired resistance is a common challenge. Interestingly, while many cancer types are able to subvert multiple signaling pathways to maintain cancer progression in spite of targeted therapies, BCC have been found to be exclusively dependent on hedgehog signaling for growth. As such, reactivation of hedgehog signaling is a significant driver for BCC drug resistance. Hedgehog pathway inhibitors are under current investigation to combat BCC resistance to vismodegib.

GPCR signaling has also been found to drive resistance in melanoma. In an open reading frame screen designed to assess drivers of resistance to MAPK inhibition in a BRAF V six hundred E mutant melanoma cell line, GPCRs emerged as the highest ranked class of resistance-driving proteins. GPCR signaling-related proteins, such as guanine exchange factors, RASGRP two to four and VAV one were also found to be potent effectors of resistance. Similarly, genome-scale approaches to determining drivers of resistance to BRAF inhibition in melanoma revealed that four of the top ten hits were GPCRs: GPR thirty-five, LPAR one, LPAR five, and P two RY eight.

ented

Interestingly, both RGS proteins and GBy subunits have been implicated as drivers of drug resistance to cancer therapy. Loss of RGS six has been found to significantly impair doxorubicin-mediated cell death in vitro, and in vivo . Similarly, loss of RGS ten and RGS seventeen have been found to contribute to chemoresistance in ovarian cancer. Mutations in G beta proteins have also been found to be broad and potent drivers of drug resistance among several cancer types. In comparative whole exome sequencing of drug-sensitive and drug-resistant ETV six ABL one positive leukemia cells, GNB one was among the most significantly mutated genes. In particular, mutation of GNB one at K eighty-nine was found to drive resistance to tyrosine-kinase inhibitors independent of the targeted kinase by induction of PI three K and MAPK signaling. Outstandingly, in several different in vitro models, ectopic expression of patient-derived G beta mutants but not wild-type G beta, rendered cells resistant to targeted kinase inhibitors, including imatinib, nilotinib, and ruxolitinib, highlighting the potent effect of G beta mutations. The broad induction of resistance to kinase inhibitors mediated by G beta mutations may represent a previously underappreciated mechanism of resistance that has yet to be fully explored clinically and mechanistically and could provide novel strategies for the treatment of drug-resistant cancers.


## GPCRs and Deregulation of Cellular Energetics

Metabolic reprogramming, from the enzyme level to the global proteome, occurs in cancer to meet the metabolic demands underlying unrestrained cell growth. GPCRs are critical regulators of numerous components of normal metabolism, including glucose and glucagon homeostasis, insulin regulation, and lipogenesis, as well as being key players in adaptive metabolic mechanisms. Moreover, many metabolic products and by-products are the cognate ligands for GPCRs. As such, various metabolite-binding GPCRs play a significant role in tumor promotion through both autocrine and paracrine mechanisms that contribute to control tumor energetic dynamics.

The lactate-binding GPR eighty-one has been found to be significantly upregulated in numerous cancer types and to be a crucial driver of tumor growth and metastasis with further roles modulating the tumor microenvironment in angiogenesis and immune evasion. Similarly GPR ninety-one, which binds succinate, has significant roles in modulation of the tumor-immune microenvironment, as well as angiogenesis, together with its role in cellular metabolism.

cented

Among the most common metabolic abnormalities in cancer, de novo nucleotide biosynthesis is often upregulated in order to support the metabolic demands associated with increased DNA and RNA synthesis. Strikingly, activation of the alpha two A adrenergic receptor, and more broadly, Gai-mediated signalling has been found to regulate purinosome formation and downstream purine biosynthesis, representing an exciting mechanism by which GPCR-mediated signalling may promote aberrant cell proliferation. A by-product of injury, hypoxia, and cell death, the release of the nucleoside adenosine into the tumor microenvironment by the breakdown of adenosine triphosphate, ATP, is also a potent signalling regulator that plays a role in multiple physiological and pathological processes. There are four subtypes of adenosine-binding GPCRs with distinct expression patterns and G protein-binding specificities. A two A R and A two B R in particular, are well-known to mediate an anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effect thus diminishing the antitumor immune response, and highlighting the complex interplay between GPCR-mediated signalling between cancer hallmarks (see above).


## Conclusions and Perspectives

GPCRs and their coupled heterotrimeric G proteins are central to a diverse array of cellular processes, including the activation of numerous signalling and transcriptional networks. Since the original discovery that G protein-mediated signalling has the potential to induce cell transformation, dysfunctional G protein-mediated signalling has been increasingly tied to cancer initiation and progression. Both mutation and aberrant expression are molecular mechanisms that contribute to subverting the normal function of GPCRs and heterotrimeric G proteins to conferring pro-oncogenic capabilities on them. However, given that GPCR signalling is centrally embedded in normal physiology, cancer cells can also modulate the function of GPCRs to promote an immune suppressive and a pro-oncogenic state through dysregulated paracrine and autocrine, oncocrine, or even compensatory signalling mechanisms.

While hyperactive GPCR and heterotrimeric G protein-driven signalling has often been found to be pro-oncogenic, a growing body of literature is supporting a paradigm of the cell context specific nature of such signalling pathways. Loss-of-function mutations or copy number loss of genes GPCRs and heterotrimeric G proteins have unveiled the tumor suppressive roles that these protein families play in certain cancer types, highlighting the complexity of G protein-driven signalling and the significant impact of cellular states in the integration and output of these signalling events. Further insight into the relationship between cell type lineage and the functional duality of GPCR signalling outcomes will likely reveal unanticipated mechanisms driving cancer, and potentially novel vulnerabilities that can be targeted therapeutically. Moreover, while GPCRs and their coupled heterotrimeric G proteins have been primarily studied from a signalling perspective, their central role in diverse cellular functions strongly suggests their involvement in broader processes such as the regulation of epigenetic networks. Future work defining these nodes of connectivity will likely expand our understanding of GPCRs in cancer even further.

antes

Within the complex network of cancer signalling, numerous opportunities arise for GPCRs to be used for therapeutic intervention. Interfering with GPCR activity using both pharmacological inhibitors and biologics, encompassing antagonists, inverse agonists, allosteric modulators, in addition to antibody-based therapies, can inform novel therapeutic strategies. Specifically, positive and negative allosteric modulators, PAMs and NAMs respectively, will likely emerge as pharmacological avenues for cancer prevention and treatment, as they may dial up or down the signalling capacity of GPCRs that are aberrantly modulated in cancer rather than directly stimulating or inhibiting them, or competing for their natural ligands. Guided towards the development of precision therapeutic approaches, more comprehensive characterization of dysregulated GPCR expression and signalling coupled with the diverse modes of action of these inhibitors will likely reveal context-specific dependencies that can provide opportunities to rationally target GPCRs for cancer therapies.

Recent studies investigating the range and depth of biased GPCR signalling, and the potential impact of GPCR mutations in G protein-coupling selectivity, will likely also enable the development of novel approaches exploiting the tremendous potential of GPCRs as signal transducers to modulate signalling in cancer and other diseases. Moreover, advances and emerging techniques in the field of gene editing may also add to the repertoire of mechanisms by which we can modulate GPCR activity.

Given the large proportion of FDA-approved drugs that target GPCRs, there is mounting evidence supporting the utility of repurposing existing drugs to block or modulate GPCR-mediated oncogenic signalling circuitries, either alone or as adjuvant therapies. Regarding the latter, drug resistance has remained a major challenge in the era of precision medicine. GPCR modulators administered along with conventional anticancer agents may allow abrogating the initiation of compensatory signalling mechanisms and resultant drug resistance. Similarly, the dynamic influx of immune cells to the tumor, which leads to a highly infiltrative "hot" tumour or a poorly infiltrative "cold" tumour, is in part dependent on the chemokine gene signature of the tumour itself, which may provide a powerful prognostic tool to predict therapeutic response rates in the clinic. Harnessing the immunomodulatory power of GPCRs or their ability to regulate tumour-immune interactions could revolutionize current immunotherapies and result in durable clinical responses while preventing tumour relapse. Investigation exploring combining GPCR-targeted therapies with existing chemo- and immunotherapies either for the treatment of cancer, or as cancer preventative strategies are currently ongoing. Ultimately, just as we gain a clearer understanding of the complex mechanisms underlying cancer initiation and progression, so too will the role of GPCRs as cancer drivers and therapeutic targets become more important.

A C


## Figure Legends

Frequencies (left column) and number (right column) of patients carrying a non-synonymous mutation in one or more heterotrimeric G protein subunits in each indicated family. Cumulative mutation frequencies and absolute number of patients carrying a mutation in one or more G proteins in each indicated family across all ten thousand four hundred thirty-seven patients in all studies are listed in the last row. Number of heterotrimeric G proteins considered in each family are listed with each family name. The data shown here are based upon data generated by the TCGA Research Network. All data was downloaded from cBio Portal.

Sheet one. Frequencies represent percentage of patients carrying a non-synonymous mutation in each respective GPCR gene. Cumulative mutation frequencies of each gene across all ten thousand four hundred thirty-seven patients in all cohorts are listed in the last column. Sheet two. Enumeration of mutation frequencies in Sheet one, depicting the number of patients carrying a mutation in each GPCR gene. Number of patients in each study are listed above with the study abbreviation. Absolute number of patients carrying a mutation in each GPCR gene across all ten thousand four hundred thirty-seven patients in all cohorts are listed in the last column. The data shown here are based upon data generated by the TCGA Research Network. All data was downloaded from cBio Portal.

Sheet one. Frequencies represent percentage of patients in each study carrying a non-synonymous mutation in one or more GPCRs in each indicated class. Cumulative mutation frequencies of each class across all ten thousand four hundred thirty-seven patients in all cohorts are listed in the last row. Number of GPCRs considered in each family are listed with the family name. Sheet two. Enumeration of mutation frequencies in Sheet one, depicting the number of patients carrying a mutation in one or more GPCRs in each indicated class. Absolute number of patients carrying a mutation in each indicated GPCR class across ten thousand four hundred thirty-seven patients in all cohorts are listed in the last row. The data shown here are based upon data generated by the TCGA Research Network. All data was downloaded from cBio Portal.

Sheet one. MutSig two CV q-values for GPCR genes. Sheet two. MutSig two CV q-values for heterotrimeric G protein genes. Significantly mutated genes, q is less than or equal to zero point one, are labeled in red. Genes for which MutSig two CV q-values were not calculated are listed as NC, not calculated. Sheet three. DOI links to data analysis hosted on FireBrowse. All data were downloaded from the Broad Institute GDAC.

Sheet one. Frequencies represent percentage of patients carrying a non-synonymous mutation in each respective heterotrimeric G protein gene. Cumulative mutation frequencies of each gene across all ten thousand four hundred thirty-seven patients in all cohorts are listed in the last row. Sheet two. Enumeration of mutation frequencies in Sheet one, depicting the number of patients carrying a mutation in each heterotrimeric G protein gene. Absolute number of patients carrying a mutation in each heterotrimeric G protein gene across all ten thousand four hundred thirty-seven patients in all cohorts are listed in the last row. The data shown here are based upon data generated by the TCGA Research Network. All data was downloaded from cBio Portal.

Sheet one. Frequencies represent percentage of patients in each study carrying a non-synonymous mutation in one or more heterotrimeric G proteins in each indicated family. Cumulative mutation frequencies of each family across all ten thousand four hundred thirty-seven patients in all cohorts are listed in the last row. Number of heterotrimeric G proteins considered in each family are listed with the family name. Sheet two. Enumeration of mutation frequencies in Sheet one, depicting the number of patients carrying a mutation in one or more heterotrimeric G proteins in each indicated family. Absolute number of patients carrying a mutation in each indicated heterotrimeric G protein family across ten thousand four hundred thirty-seven patients in all cohorts are listed in the last row. The data shown here are based upon data generated by the TCGA Research Network. All data was downloaded from cBio Portal.

An ultraviolet radiation independent pathway to melanoma carcinogenesis in the red hair fair skin background. Nature four ninety-one, four four nine to four five three, doi ten point one zero three eight slash nature one one six two four