## p2n3-2024-09-03_20_13_54-route.pdf

One-iodobuta-one,three-diynes in Copper-Catalyzed Azide-Alkyne Cycloaddition: A One-Step Route to Four-Ethynyl-Five-iodo-One,Two,Three-triazoles


## Supporting Information

INTRODUCTION

During recent years one,two,three-triazoles have been holding a leadership in different areas of fundamental and applied research. The fields of one,two,three-triazole application are described in numerous recent reviews. The main trends are bioorthogonal chemistry, organic synthesis, creation of new ligands and complexes and using the latter as catalysts, construction of functionalized macromolecules and polymeric materials, modified nanoparticles, sensors, blocks for energetic materials, the use in medicinal chemistry for the search of new biologically active compounds, and as approved medicines.

Such a broad application of triazoles is a result of not only their functionality but also their synthetic accessibility. Among the synthetic approaches toward one,two,three-triazoles, four general directions could be stressed: metal-catalyzed alkyne-azide cycloaddition including mostly Copper-catalyzed P equals two four, equals two five and Ruthenium-catalyzed, strain-promoted alkyne-azide cycloaddition, organocatalytic synthesis of triazoles from azides and nonalkyne C three synthones fifty-one using enamine-mediated or enolate-mediated routes, and azide/alkyne/metal-free approaches. Among these methodologies, Copper-catalyzed alkyne-azide cycloaddition, discovered by Sharpless, Fokin, and Meldal groups independently in two thousand two, remains number one for the synthesis of one,four-disubstituted one,two,three-triazoles due to high regioselectivity, efficiency, and tolerance in the presence of many functional groups.

Since the discovery, Copper-catalyzed alkyne-azide cycloaddition has been also expanded for the regioselective synthesis of five-iodo(bromo)-one,four-disubstituted one,two,three-triazoles starting from iodo(bromo) alkynes (Scheme one A) and one-substituted four-ethynyl-one,two,three-triazoles from either terminal diacetylenes or trialkylsilylbuta-one,three-diynes with a one-pot desilylation (Scheme one D).

Taking into account that both a halogen atom, especially iodine, and a triple bond are useful functional groups responsible for special properties and possibility of further chemical modification, other methods for the synthesis of five-iodo- and four-ethynyltriazoles have been elaborated. Copper-catalyzed alkyne-azide cycloaddition in the presence of electrophilic iodine species generated in situ and amine ligands has been investigated for the synthesis

Conditions: seven e (zero point one millimoles), eight a (zero point one millimoles), and a catalyst (five mol percent) were used in an appropriate solvent with the addition of an appropriate ligand with a reaction time of eighteen hours at room temperature. NMR conversion and yields. One,three,five-trimethoxybenzene was used as an internal standard. One mol percent catalyst was used; TEA, triethylamine; TBTA, tris(benzyltriazolylmethyl)amine; CuCl(IPr), chloro[one,three-bis(two,six-diisopropylphenyl)imidazol- two-ylidene ]copper(One).

of five-iodotriazoles (Scheme one B) and was employed for the preparation of bioactive triazole derivatives. An approach based on direct C five lithiation of one,four-substituted triazoles with subsequent halogenation was also proposed for obtaining of some five-iodo derivatives (Scheme one C). An alternative way for the synthesis of four- ethynyltriazoles reported earlier used the reaction of one,two,three-triazoles-four-carbaldehydes with the Bestmann-Ohira reagent (Scheme one E).

While some methodologies are presently available for the preparation of five-iodo- and four-ethynyl-one,two,three-triazoles, among one,two,three-triazoles having both halogen and ethynyl moieties, the only example of a five-chloro derivative accessible through a multistep synthetic sequence has been reported and four-ethynyl-five-iodo-one,two,three-triazoles still remain unknown.

We decided to study Copper-catalyzed alkyne-azide cycloaddition of one-iodobuta-one,three-diynes with organic azides as a one-step synthetic approach to four-ethynyl-fiveiodo-one,two,three-triazoles (Scheme one F), taking into account that routes B and C being applied to the terminal buta-one,three-diynes and four-ethynyl-one,two,three-triazoles, respectively, could be complicated with side reactions such as iodination of the second triple bond by electrophilic iodine species or acetylene-allene isomerization induced by strong bases. In the present work, we report the scope and limitation of this methodology along with the synthetic utility of four-ethynyl-five-iodo-one,two,three-triazoles as versatile synthetic intermediates.


## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

It is of first importance that starting one-iodobuta-one,three-diynes seven a-j are synthetically available compounds and can be synthesized either by iodination of terminal buta-one,three-diynes using different iodination agents or from trimethylsilyl-protected buta-one,three-diynes through a one-pot desilylation/iodination approach (Scheme two).

Terminal diacetylenes bearing aromatic substituents five a through d were synthesized from diacetylenic diol one hundred seventy-four by potassium carbonate-induced selective deprotection of one carbinol group by the retro-Favorskii reaction followed by the Sonogashira coupling of resulting two-methylhexa-three,five-diyn-two-ol with iodoarenes and the second retro-Favorskii reaction (Scheme two). Trimethylsilyl-protected buta-one,three-diynes six c through e were prepared by the Cadiot-Chodkiewicz coupling according to known procedures. Trimethylsilyl-Protected arylbuta-one,three-diynes six a and b were available through the Sonogashira coupling of corresponding bromoalkynes with trimethylsilyl-acetylene. Iodination of terminal buta-one,three-diynes using the N-iodosuccinimide/silver nitrate system proceeded in high yields for diacetylenes two and five a, b, d, affording iodides seven a, b, d, j. However, in the case of four-(para-dimethylaminophenyl)-buta-one,three-diyne five c, iodination with the use of NIS/DBU was more efficient for the synthesis of seven c. The second approach toward iodobutadiynes based on desilylation/iodination of trimethylsilyl-diacetylenes six a through e in one-pot by NIS/silver fluoride allowed compounds seven e through i to be obtained in high yields (Scheme two).

Initially, copper(I)-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) of para-tolylbuta-one,three-diyne seven e with benzyl azide eight a was studied for the search of optimal conditions. A series of copper catalysts, ligands, and solvents employed earlier for the successful synthesis of five-iodo-1,4-triazoles and five-unsubstituted 1,4-triazoles were tested.

We found that the result of the reaction strongly depends on the nature of a catalyst, a ligand, and a solvent. It was a surprise that copper iodide with different ligands reported as the best conditions for the synthesis of five-iodotriazoles gave unsatisfactory results with the iododiacetylene seven e. The maximal twenty-five percent yield of triazole nine a was reached in the case of tris-benzyltriazolylmethylamine (TBTA) ligand. Moreover, when we used triethylamine (TEA) as a ligand and acetonitrile as a solvent instead of tetrahydrofuran, the main reaction product detected in the reaction mixture was a tetrayne eleven. In the presence of copper iodide with glycerol, no conversion of the starting compound was observed. Solvent-free conditions using the complex copper iodide-triphenylphosphine three together with two,six-lutidine as a ligand turned out to be the most effective catalytic system, providing a complete conversion of the starting iodobutadiyne to ethynyliodotriazole nine a in ninety-two percent yield.

Despite the fact that the copper(I) complex with N-heterocyclic carbene ligand was very efficient in the case of iodoalkyne/azide cycloaddition, for iododiacetylene seven e, no traces of any products were detected in the reaction mixture after eighteen hours. When copper acetate with TBTA was used, the reaction proceeded very slowly giving only traces of cycloaddition product nine a.

Then the scope of copper-catalyzed one-iodobuta-one,three-diyne/azide cycloaddition was explored with respect to the substituents effect at conjugate triple bonds (Scheme three).

Copper iodide-triphenylphosphine three in the presence of two,six-lutidine was chosen as the best catalytic system. Iodobutadiynes bearing aromatic substituents with both electron-donating groups seven c, e, f and electron-withdrawing groups seven a, b and hydroxyalkyl-substituted iododiacetylenes seven g, j were studied in CuAAC with benzylazide eight a. It should be particularly emphasized that the reaction studied proceeds with a high chemoselectivity and regioselectivity and afforded exclusively one-benzyl-four-ethynyl-five-iodo-1,2,3-triazoles nine a through h in high yields.

The formation of five-iodo-four-ethynyl-1,2,3-triazoles was proved by the two-D nuclear magnetic resonance analysis of triazole nine a and additionally by X-ray analysis of the cross-coupling products thirteen d and fifteen a and b of five-iodo-four-ethynyl-1,2,3-triazoles nine a, c, d (see below).

A preferred coordination of a copper-catalyst to an iodo-substituted triple bond compared with an internal triple bond is supposed to be a reason for the excellent chemoselectivity of azide interaction with the iodo-substituted triple bond of one-iodobuta-one,three-diynes. On the other hand, a regioselective reaction of azides with one-iodobutadiynes could be explained by the mechanism of CuAAC for iodoalkynes with less activation barrier values for the formation of one,four-cycloadducts rather than for one,five-cycloadducts that is in agreement with numerous examples of CuAAC for iodoalkynes.

It is important to note that cycloaddition of hydroxyalkyl iododiacetylenes seven g, j and dimethylamino derivative seven c required two mole percent catalyst instead of one mole percent catalyst in order to reach full conversion of one-iodo(buta-one,three-diyne). In the case of iodopenyldiacetylenes with an electron-withdrawing group, an increased catalyst loading was also essential. While two mole percent was optimal for four-chlorophenyl-substituted diyne seven a, a stronger electron-withdrawing group nitro, seven b demanded five mole percent catalyst. The drop of reactivity for iodobutadiynes bearing an electron-withdrawing group could be explained in less donating ability of the iodo-substituted triple bond because of conjugation with the electron-withdrawing group, that would hinder the formation of pi copper-alkyne complexes, which is very important in the proposed mechanism of CuAAC with iodoalkynes.

Further reaction capabilities have been studied using a series of structurally and functionally diverse azides eight b through i with variedly substituted one-iodobutadiynes seven a, g through j (Scheme four).

Benzyl azides with donor eight b, c and acceptor groups 8f, alkyl azides eight d including azides with FG 8d,g, p-methoxyphenylazide 8h, and nitrotosylazide 8e were investigated in CuAAC with different iododiacetylenes. In all cases except nitrotosylazide 8e, the reaction afforded 4-ethynyl-5-iodotriazoles from moderate to high yields. In the case of nitrotosylazide 8e, only starting materials were detected in the reaction mixture after forty-eight hours even though five mol percent catalyst was used. Synthesis employing either OH-substituted alkylazide 8g or iodobutadiynes 7g, j required a higher catalyst loading (two-five mol percent). The scope of the reaction was also expanded to arylazide 8h, which required five mol percent CuI(PPh3)3 for the full conversion giving one-aryl-substituted triazole 9o.

On the next step, we evaluated a synthetic application of four-ethynyl-5-iodotriazoles. Two types of reactions involving an iodine atom, which lead to one, four, five-trisubstituted triazoles were explored, the Sonogashira-Hagihara and the Suzuki-Miyaura couplings.

It is important that both types of products, triazole-fused enediynes and five-aryl-four-ethynyltriazoles, are of special importance because of possible further intramolecular cyclizations known for other types of benzene(heteroarene)-fused enediynes and ortho-ethynylaryl-substituted arenes, leading to highly conjugated polyaromatic compounds. Among such systems, polycyclic fused one, two, three-triazoles are of particular interest.

We started with the synthesis of enediynes. Remarkably, a triple bond has been introduced into position five of a triazole ring mostly using the Sonogashira coupling, yet several examples for the synthesis of four-aryl-five-ethynyl-one, two, three-triazole using one-pot CuAAC/ethynylation have also been reported.

Common conditions for the Sonogashira reaction of four-aryl-five-iodo-one, two, three-triazoles (Pd(PPh3)4/CuI/K2CO3/THF, sixty-five

°C and Pd(PPh3)4/Cul/Et3N/toluene, eighty °C) were initially employed for coupling of iodotriazole 9b with four-MeO-phenylacetylene 12a and two-methylbuta-three-yn-two-ol 12b, respectively. Surprisingly, the reaction with alkynol 12b proceeded with a partial deiodination of iodotriazole 9b. A mixture of the desired enediyne 13b along with reduced four-ethynyltriazole and a significant amount of the alkyne homocoupling byproduct was obtained. The reaction with four-MeO-phenylacetylene 12a reached only approximately sixty percent conversion of starting iodide to enediyne. Switching to other conditions useful for the Sonogashira coupling in the synthesis of enediynes fused to heterocycles gave either a poor conversion or mixture of target enediynes with the deiodinated starting triazole. Taking into account electron-withdrawing properties of a triple bond neighbor to iodine, we analyzed examples of the Sonogashira reaction for five-iodotriazoles bearing an EWG at the C4 position reported earlier. The literature search revealed that low conversion and reductive deiodination are common problems for the Sonogashira coupling of five-iodo-one, two, three-triazolecarboxylates, carboxamides, nitriles, and even five-iodo-four-phenyl-triazoles. It is particularly remarkable that for five-iodotriazoles with an EWG at N-one the Sonogashira reaction proceeded smoothly, while for triazole with bulky EDG (ferrocenyl) the yields also were low. The best and the simplest solution was found by David Goyard et al., who carried out both the Sonogashira and the Suzuki coupling using K3PO4 as a base and Pd(PPh3)4 as a catalyst in THF.

These conditions also worked perfectly for the cross-coupling of four-ethynyl-five-iodotriazoles with acetylenes, providing unsymmetrically substituted enediynes thirteen a - g fused to one, two, three-triazole ring in high yields (Scheme five). These conditions proved to be FG tolerant, which allowed OH functions and substituted amino groups to be introduced into an enediyne system. Unsymmetrically substituted enediynes such as thirteen e - g are of crucial importance because they could be used as starting compounds for the synthesis of macrocyclic triazole-fused enediynes by the Nicholas-type macrocyclization.

The Suzuki coupling of N-benzyliodotriazoles nine c, d, m proceeded in high yields also using Pd(PPh3)4 as a catalyst and K3PO4 as a base providing five-aryl-four-ethynyltriazoles 15a-c in moderate to good yields (Scheme six). In contrast with N-benzyl-substituted five-iodotriazoles, the reaction of N-(four-methoxyphenyl) triazole 9o gave the coupling product 15d in a low yield because of a formation of an unidentified byproduct complex mixture. The possible reason for this exception could be a relatively easy five-iodotriazole ring opening promoted by both N-aryl group and EWG (four-(chlorophenyl)-ethynyl) at C-four of the triazole ring. Thus, the palladium-catalyzed denitrogenative indolization of N-aroylbenzotriazoles with internal alkynes has been reported previously.

Additional synthetic utility of enediyne thirteen D bearing ethynyl and M E two N groups at the ortho-position of a benzene ring was illustrated by electrophile-induced cyclization twenty-seven that led to two-triazolyl-three-iodoindole sixteen.

Sixteen seventy-four. In summary, an efficient and convenient one-step approach toward one-substituted four-ethynyl-five-iodo-one, two, three-triazoles was developed based on CuAAC of one-iodobutadiynes with organic azides using a C u I P Ph three three two six catalytic system. The reaction is tolerant to various functional groups and allows alkyl, aryl, hydroxyalkyl, ethoxycarbonyl, and dialkylamino functional groups to be introduced into different positions of target triazoles. Four-ethynyl-five-iodo-one, two, three-triazoles were demonstrated to be useful building blocks for the synthesis of triazole-fused enediyne systems and five-aryl-four-ethynyltriazoles, which are of great interest because of their further synthetic utility.


## EXPERIMENTAL SECTION

General Information and Methods. Solvents, reagents, and chemicals (two-methylbut-three-yn-two-ol, iodoarenes) used for reactions were purchased from commercial suppliers. Catalyst Pd P Ph three four was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Solvents were dried under standard conditions, and chemicals were used without further purification. Catalysts C u P Ph three three I twelve and CuCI(IPr), chloro[one, three-bis(two, six-diisopropylphenyl)imidazol-two-ylidene]copper(I), were synthesized by known procedures without any modification. Benzyl azide (eight a),

one-(azidomethyl)-four-methoxybenzene (eight b), five-(azidomethyl)-one, two, three-trimethoxybenzene (eight c), ethyl two-azidoacetate (eight d), one-(azidomethyl)-four-nitrobenzene (eight f), six-azidohexan-one-ol (eight g), one-azido-four-methoxybenzene (eight h), one-azidohexane (eight i), two, seven-dimethylocta-three, five-diyne-two, seven-diol (one), buta-one, three-diyn-one-ylbenzenes (four d, five d), methyl(p-tolylbuta-one, three-diyn-one-yl)silane (six a), (((four-methoxyphenyl)buta-one, three-diyn-one-yl)trimethylsilane (six b), six-(trimethylsilyl)hexa-three, five-diyn-one-ol (six c), one fifteen trimethyl(penthyl)silane (six d), and methoxymethyltrimethylsilane six e were synthesized using previously reported procedures.

Evaporation of solvents and concentration of reaction mixtures were performed in vacuo at thirty-five degrees Celsius on a rotary evaporator. Thin-layer chromatography (TLC) was carried out on silica gel plates (Silica gel sixty, UV two fifty-four) with detection by UV or staining with a basic aqueous solution of KMnO4. Melting points (mp) determined are uncorrected. Proton and Carbon thirteen{Proton} NMR spectra were recorded at four hundred and one hundred MHz, respectively, at twenty-five degrees Celsius in CDCl3 without the internal standard. The Proton NMR data are reported as chemical shifts (delta), multiplicity (s, singlet; d, doublet; t, triplet; q, quartet; m, multiplet; br, broad), coupling constants (J, given in Hertz), and number of protons. The Carbon thirteen NMR data are reported as the chemical shifts (S) and type of carbon (p, primary; s, secondary; t, tertiary; q, quaternary) determined from DEPT experiments with coupling constant J C-F for F-containing compounds. Chemical shifts for Proton and Carbon thirteen are reported as delta values (ppm) and referenced to a residual solvent delta equals seven point two six ppm for Proton; delta equals seventy-seven point one six ppm for Carbon thirteen. High-resolution mass spectra (HRMS) were determined using electrospray ionization (ESI) in the mode of positive ion registration with a TOF mass analyzer. High-resolution mass spectra of compound seven e (methanol solution) were recorded on a Bruker maXis Q-TOF instrument equipped with an atmospheric pressure chemical ionization ion source in positive ion mode. IR spectra were recorded for tablets with KBr. The single-crystal X-ray diffraction studies were carried out on a diffractometer at one hundred Kelvin using Cu Ka radiation (one equals one point five four one eight zero Å). Using Olex two, the structure was solved with the Super flip structure solution program using Charge Flipping and refined with the ShelXL refinement package using least-squares minimization.

Two-Methylhexa-three, five-diyn-two-ol. A modified method reported earlier was used. A mixture of two, seven-dimethyl-three, five-octadiyne-two, seven-diol (one) (nine point nine six grams, sixty millimoles), and potassium carbonate (one point two nine grams, nine point four millimoles) was placed into a vacuum distillation apparatus followed by one milliliter of a high-vacuum oil. The pressure was reduced to thirty Torr, and the apparatus was dipped into a preheated oil bath (bath temperature one hundred ninety to one hundred ninety-five degrees Celsius) and heated rapidly. After the melting of the reaction mixture, the vigorous liberation of acetone occurred and the product started to distill (ninety-five degrees Celsius at thirty Torr). The second distillation (boiling point fifty-two to fifty-four degrees Celsius at three Torr) gave two-methylhexa-three, five-diyn-two-ol (three point five seven grams, fifty-five percent yield): boiling point thirty-six to thirty-seven degrees Celsius at zero point four Torr; proton NMR (CDC13, four hundred point one three megahertz, delta) two point two zero (s, one proton), two point zero two (br s, one proton, OH), one point five four (s, six protons).

General Procedure for the Synthesis of Aryldiacetylenes by the Sonogashira Reaction. To the solution of iodoarene were added terminal diacetylene two (one point five zero equivalents), Palladium (five mol percent), and Copper (ten mol percent). The resulting solution was evacuated and flushed with Argon several times and allowed to stir at room temperature. After completion of the reaction (TLC control), the reaction mixture was poured into a saturated aqueous solution of ammonium chloride, extracted with ethyl acetate, washed with saturated solution of ammonium chloride and brine, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, and concentrated under reduced pressure to yield the crude product, which was purified by column chromatography on silica gel.

Six-(four-chlorophenyl)-two-methylhexa-three, five-diyn-two-ol. This compound was synthesized from two-methylhexa-three, five-diyn-two-ol (six hundred forty-eight point eight milligrams, six millimoles) and one-chloro-four-iodobenzene (four millimoles). The crude product was purified by column chromatography (eluent: hexane/ethyl acetate equals three to one) to afford a yellow solid (eight hundred seventy-two milligrams, ninety-nine percent yield): proton NMR (CDC13, four hundred point one three megahertz, delta) seven point four zero (d, J equals eight point five Hertz, two protons), seven point two nine (d, J equals eight point five Hertz, two protons), one point five eight (s, six protons).

Two-Methyl-six-(four-nitrophenyl)hexa-three, five-diyn-two-ol. This compound was synthesized from three, five-diyne-two-ol (six hundred forty-eight point eight milligrams, six millimoles) and one-iodo-four-nitrobenzene.

The crude product was purified by column chromatography (eluent: ethyl acetate equals three to one) to afford a yellow solid (seven hundred forty-two milligrams, eighty-one percent yield): proton NMR (CDC13, four hundred point one three megahertz, delta) eight point one nine (d, J equals eight point six Hertz, two protons), seven point six two (d, J equals eight point six Hertz, two protons), one point five nine (s, six protons).

Six-(four-(dimethylamino)phenyl)-two-methylhexa-three, five-diyn-two-ol. This compound was synthesized from two-methylhexa-three, five-diyn-two-ol (six hundred five point four milligrams, five point six millimoles) and four-iodo-N, N-dimethylaniline (nine hundred eighty-eight point zero milligrams, four millimoles). The crude product was purified by column chromatography (eluent: hexane/ethyl acetate equals five to one) to afford a yellow solid (six hundred fifty-six milligrams, seventy-two percent yield): proton NMR (CDC13, four hundred point one three megahertz, delta) seven point three six (d, J equals nine point zero Hertz, two protons), six point five nine (d, J equals nine point zero Hertz, two protons), two point nine eight (s, six protons), one point five seven (s, six protons).

The halogenation of terminal diynes (method B) is described as follows: To a solution of buta-one, three-diyne five (one equivalent) in ten milliliters of acetone under an atmosphere of Argon and in the dark was added silver nitrate (three mol percent), and the mixture was stirred at room temperature for twenty minutes. Then NIS (one point one equivalent) was added, and the mixture was stirred for several hours until the completion of the reaction (TLC control). Acetone was removed under reduced pressure. Ethyl acetate (fifteen to twenty milliliters) was added to the residue. The resulting mixture was washed with water (three times fifteen milliliters), the organic layer was separated, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, and evaporated under reduced pressure to yield the crude product, which was purified by column chromatography.

Six-Iodohexa-three, five-diyn-one-ol. This compound was synthesized in accordance with method A from six-(trimethylsilyl)hexa-three, five-diyn-one-ol.

<LATEX>\begin{array}{} { \text { DOL: } 1 0 . 1 0 2 1 / 2 \text { cs } 5 0 \text { c- } 8 b 0 2 9 1 6 } \\ { \text { Drg. Ghem. } 2 0 1 9 , 8 4 , 1 9 2 5 - 1 9 4 0 } \end{array}</LATEX> 1931

Six C. Three hundred fifteen point nine milligrams, one point ninety millimoles. The crude product was purified by column chromatography to afford a light brown solid. Three hundred four milligrams, seventy-two percent yield: One H NMR CDCl three, four hundred point thirteen megahertz, eight) three point seventy-five (t, J equals six point two Hertz, two H, C H two), two point fifty-seven (t, J equals six point two Hertz, two H, C H two), one point eighty (s, one H, OH); thirteen C{one H} NMR (CDCl three, one hundred point six megahertz, eight) seventy-eight point five (q), seventy-three point seven (q), sixty-eight point zero (q), sixty point eight (s), twenty-three point five (s), negative three point nine (q); HRMS ESI [M plus Na]+ calculated for C six H five O I Na+ two hundred forty-two point nine two seven seven, found two hundred forty-two point nine two seven zero.

Megahertz, eight) one hundred forty point seven (q), one hundred thirty-three point three (t), one hundred twenty-nine point five (t), one hundred seventeen point six (q), seventy-eight point two (q), seventy-four point one (q), sixty-seven point two (q), sixty-three point nine (q), twenty-one point nine (p).

Four-((one-Benzyl-five-iodo-one H-one, two, three-triazol-four-yl)ethynyl)-N,N-dimethylaniline (nine d). This compound was prepared in accordance with the general procedure from benzyl azide eight a (twenty-nine point three milligrams, zero point two hundred twenty millimoles), one-iodo(buta-one, three-diyne) seven c (sixty-five point zero milligrams, zero point two hundred twenty millimoles), [CuI(PPh three) three] (four point thirty milligrams, two mole percent), and two, six-lutidine (one point zero zero milligrams) with a reaction time of eighteen hours. The crude product was purified by column chromatography to afford a brown solid (sixty-nine milligrams, seventy-three percent yield): melting point one hundred seventy-one to one hundred seventy-two degrees Celsius (with decomposition); One H NMR (CDCl three, four hundred point thirteen megahertz, eight) seven point forty-six to seven point forty-two (m, two H), seven point thirty-eight to seven point thirty (m, three H), seven point thirty to seven point twenty-six (m, five point fifty-nine (s, two H, C H two), two point ninety-nine (s, six H, (C H three) two N); <LATEX>one three C H N M R left( C D C one three , right.</LATEX> One hundred point six megahertz, eight) one hundred fifty point seven (q), one hundred thirty-nine point five (q), one hundred thirty-four point two (q), one hundred thirty-three point one (t), one hundred twenty-nine point one (t), one hundred twenty-eight point seven (t), one hundred twenty-seven point nine (t), one hundred eleven point eight (t), one hundred eight point eight (q), ninety-six point six (q), eighty-three point five (q), seventy-six point four (q), fifty-four point eight (s), forty point three (p); IR <LATEX>left( c m to the negative one right) nu two two one eight</LATEX> (C triple bond C); HRMS ESI <LATEX>left[ M plus Na right] to the power of positive</LATEX> calculated for C nineteen H seventeen I N four Na+ four hundred fifty-one point zero three nine zero, found four hundred fifty-one point zero three nine two.

Five-Iodo-one-(four-methoxybenzyl)-four-(three-methoxyprop-one-yn-one-yl)-one H-one, two, three-triazole (nine i). This compound was prepared in with the general procedure from four-methoxybenzyl azide eight b <LATEX>left( eighty-one point five milligrams, zero point five right.</LATEX> millimoles, one-iodo(buta-one, three-diyne) seven i (one hundred ten milligrams, zero point five millimoles), [CuI(PPh three) three] (four point eighty-eight milligrams, one mole percent), and two, six-lutidine (two point fourteen milligrams) with a reaction time of eighteen hours. The crude product was purified by column chromatography to afford a white solid (one hundred forty-two milligrams, seventy-four percent yield): melting point ninety-eight point five to one hundred degrees Celsius; one H NMR (CDCl three, four hundred point thirteen megahertz, eight) seven point twenty-five to seven point twenty-one (m, two H), six point eighty-eight to six point eighty-four (m, two H), five point fifty (s, two H, C H two), four point thirty-six (s, two H, C H two), three point seventy-nine (s, three H, O C H three), three point forty-six (s, three H, O C H three); thirteen C{one H} NMR (CDCl three, one hundred point six megahertz, eight) one hundred sixty point one (q), one hundred thirty-eight point one (q), one hundred twenty-nine point six (t), one hundred twenty-six point one (q), one hundred fourteen point five (t), ninety-one point three (q), eighty-four point zero (q), seventy-five point nine (q), sixty point three (s), fifty-seven point eight (p), fifty-five point five (p), fifty-four point five (s); HRMS ESI [M plus Na]+ calculated for <LATEX>C to the power of fourteen H to the power of fourteen I N to the power of three O to the power of two N a to the power of positive four hundred six point zero zero two three,</LATEX> found four hundred six point zero zero two eight.

Four minus left parenthesis one four minus C H divided by zero right. Four minus left parenthesis four-Chlorophenyl right parenthesis ethynyl dash five-iodo-one dash four-methoxyphenyl dash one H dash one two three-triazole (ninety). This compound was prepared in accordance with the general procedure from one-azido-four-methoxybenzene eight H (thirty-six point five milligrams, zero point two four four a left parenthesis C U I left parenthesis P P H three right parenthesis three right parenthesis left parenthesis eleven point nine milligrams, five mole percent right parenthesis, and two, zero chromatography (eluent: hexane/acetone sixty-five percent; seventy-one percent conversion one-iodo dash buta-one three-diyne seven a): melting point one sixty-two to one sixty-three degrees Celsius. One H NMR (C D C thirteen, four hundred point one three megahertz, delta) seven point five six to seven point five one (multiplet, two H),

seven point four nine to seven point four three (multiplet, two H), seven point three eight to seven point three three (multiplet, two H), seven point zero eight to seven point zero one (multiplet, two H, Aromatic), three point nine zero (singlet, three H, O C H three); thirteen C{one H} NMR (C D C thirteen, one hundred point six megahertz, delta) one sixty-one point one (quaternary), one thirty-eight point five (quaternary), one thirty-five point three (quaternary), one thirty-three point two (ternary), one twenty-nine point six (quaternary), one twenty-nine point zero (ternary), one twenty-seven point four (ternary), one twenty point eight (quaternary), one fourteen point seven (ternary), ninety-four point one (quaternary), eighty-five point nine (quaternary), seventy-nine point five (quaternary), fifty-five point eight (primary); I R left parenthesis centimeters to the negative one right parenthesis nu two two three one left parenthesis C triple bond C right parenthesis H R M S E S I [M plus H]+ calculated for C seventeen H twelve C I I N three O+ four hundred thirty-five point nine seven zero eight, found four hundred thirty-five point nine seven zero zero.

One-Benzyl-five-left parenthesis four-methoxyphenyl right parenthesis ethynyl dash four-phenylethynyl dash one H dash one two three-triazole (thirteen a). This compound was prepared in accordance with the general procedure from five-iodo-one H-one two three-triazole nine b (nineteen point three milligrams, zero point zero five zero millimoles) and one-ethynyl-four-methoxybenzene twelve a left parenthesis thirteen point two milligrams, right parenthesis zero point one zero zero millimoles, two equivalents with a reaction time of sixteen hours. The crude was purified by chromatography (eluent: hexane/E t O A c equals five to one) to afford a beige solid (five one H NMR megahertz, delta) seven point five eight to seven point five six (multiplet,

two H), seven point four eight to seven point four two (multiplet, two H), seven point three eight to seven point three three left parenthesis multiplet, right parenthesis eight H), six point nine four to six point eight eight (multiplet, two H), five point six two (singlet, two H, C H two), three point eight five (singlet, three H, O C H three); thirteen C{one H} NMR (C D C thirteen, one hundred point six megahertz, delta) one sixty-one point zero (quaternary), one thirty-four point five (quaternary), one thirty-three point eight (quaternary), one thirty-three point five (ternary), one thirty-one point nine (ternary), one twenty-nine point one (ternary), one twenty-nine point zero (ternary), one twenty-eight point eight (ternary), one twenty-eight point five (ternary), one twenty-eight point three (ternary), one twenty-four point two (quaternary), one twenty-two point five (quaternary), one fourteen point five (ternary), one thirteen point two (quaternary), one hundred three point eight (quaternary), ninety-five point three (quaternary), seventy-eight point five (quaternary), seventy-two point six (quaternary), fifty-five point fifty-five (primary), fifty-three point four (singlet); I R (centimeters to the negative one) v two two one seven (C equals C); H R M S E S I [M plus H]+ calculated for C twenty-six H twenty N three O+ three hundred ninety point one six zero one, found three hundred ninety point one six zero five.

begin array {} text D O L: ten point one zero two one slash two text C S five zero c dash eight b zero two nine one six text Drg. Ghem. twenty nineteen, eighty-four, nineteen twenty-five to nineteen forty end array. Nineteen thirty-four

Two two four two (C equals C); H R M S E S I left parenthesis M plus N a right parenthesis plus calculated for C twenty H twenty-three N three O five N a plus four hundred eight point one five three zero, found four hundred eight point one five three one.

Four-left parenthesis one-Benzyl-four-left parenthesis four-left parenthesis dimethylamino right parenthesis phenyl right parenthesis ethynyl right parenthesis-one H-one, two, three-triazole dash five-yl right parenthesis benzonitrile (fifteen b). This compound was prepared in accordance with the general procedure from five-iodo-one H-one, two, three-triazole

Nine D (sixty point zero milligrams, zero point one four zero millimoles) and four-cyanophenylboronic acid fourteen B (forty-one point two milligrams, zero point two eight zero millimoles) with a reaction time of twenty hours. The crude product was purified by column chromatography (eluent: hexane/acetone equals three to one) to afford a yellow pale solid (forty-one milligrams, seventy-two percent yield): one H NMR (CDCl3, four hundred point one three megahertz, eight) seven point seven four to seven point six eight (multiplet, two H), seven point five seven to seven point five three (multiplet, two H), seven point three three to seven point two seven (multiplet, five H), seven point zero eight to seven point zero five (multiplet, two H), six point six three to six point five seven (multiplet, two H), five point five eight (singlet, two H, CH two), two point nine eight (singlet, six H, N(CH three) two); thirteen C{one H} NMR (CDCl3, one hundred point six megahertz, eight) one hundred thirty-six point eight (quintet), one hundred thirty-four point eight (quintet), one hundred thirty-three point zero (triplet), one hundred thirty-two point seven (triplet), one hundred thirty-one point eight (quintet), one hundred thirty-one point one (quintet), one hundred twenty-nine point nine (triplet), one hundred twenty-nine point two (triplet), one hundred twenty-eight point seven (triplet), one hundred twenty-seven point one (triplet), one hundred eighteen point two (quintet), one hundred thirteen point five (quintet), one hundred eleven point eight (triplet), one hundred eight point five (quintet), ninety-five point seven (quintet), seventy-six point four (quintet), fifty-two point nine (singlet), forty point two (pentet); IR (centimeter to the negative one) nu two thousand two hundred twenty-three (C equals C, C equals N); HRMS ESI C twenty-six H twenty-one N five N four hundred twenty-six point one six eight nine, found four hundred twenty-six point one six eight nine. Grown from the solution in chloroform by single crystals of one Sb were the vapor exchange with hexane. Crystallographic data (excluding structure factors) for structures reported in this work have been deposited with Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre as supplementary publication number CCDC one hundred eighty-six nine hundred seventy-three seven (Figure S three).


## ASSOCIATED CONTENT

Supporting Information

The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the A C S Publications website.

Conditions optimization for the Sonogashira coupling, copies of one H, thirteen C'H, and DEPT NMR spectra, and X-ray details for compounds thirteen D and fifteen A,B. Crystal data for fifteen B (CIF) Crystal data for thirteen D (CIF) Crystal data for fifteen A (CIF)


## AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Author


## ORCID

Anastasia I. Govdi: zero zero zero zero dash zero zero zero one dash six four zero three dash eight two four one Natalia A. Danilkina: zero zero zero zero dash zero zero zero two dash one six nine three dash zero zero five six

Irina A. Balova: zero zero zero zero dash zero zero zero two dash eight five nine three dash four seven five five


## Notes

The authors declare no competing financial interest.


## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This study was supported by Saint Petersburg State University (SPbU) (twelve dot forty dot five one five dot two zero one seven) and by RFBR (eighteen dash thirty-three dash zero one two one three). The research was carried out by using the equipment of the SPbU Resource Centres: Magnetic Resonance Research Centre, Chemical Analysis and Materials Research Centre, Centre for X-ray Diffraction Studies, Chemistry Educational Centre. High-resolution mass spectra of compound seven E was recorded in Section of Structural Studies, N. D. Zelinsky Institute of Organic Chemistry RAS. We are grateful to Doctor Vladimir Mikhailov (SPbU) for the synthesis of the CuCl(IPr) catalyst.

iodo-four-(four-nitrophenyl)buta-one,three-diyne, the reaction mixture was completely heterogeneous, we tried to homogenize it by adding MeCN zero point three molar solution of starting iododiyne. To our surprise, the presence of MeCN decreased the rate of cycloaddition, and after twenty-four hours, the ratio of triazole-diyne was found to be one to two point two. Only increasing the catalyst loading up to five mole percent CuI(PPh3)3 gave full conversion of iodide.


## Article

one-B-D-Ribofuranosyl-oneH-[one,two,three]triazole-four-carboxylic Acid Amide (ETCAR) and Its Analogues: Synthesis and Cytotoxic Properties. Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry. twenty eleven, nineteen, four three eight six to four three nine eight.