## cuin-2024-08-26_18_17_11-practical.pdf

Practical approach for the diagnosis of biliary atresia on imaging, part two: magnetic resonance cholecystopancreatography, hepatobiliary scintigraphy, percutaneous cholecystocholangiography, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, percutaneous liver biopsy, risk scores and decisional flowchart


## Abstract

We aim to present a practical approach to imaging in suspected biliary atresia, an inflammatory cholangiopathy of infancy resulting in progressive fibrosis and obliteration of extrahepatic and intrahepatic bile ducts. Left untreated or with failure of the Kasai procedure, biliary atresia progresses to biliary cirrhosis, end-stage liver failure and death within the first years of life. Differentiating biliary atresia from other nonsurgical causes of neonatal cholestasis is difficult as there is no single method for diagnosing biliary atresia and clinical, laboratory and imaging features of this disease overlap with those of other causes of neonatal cholestasis. In this second part, we discuss the roles of magnetic resonance cholecystopancreatography, hepatobiliary scintigraphy, percutaneous biopsy and percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography. Among imaging techniques, ultrasound signs have a high specificity, although a normal ultrasound examination does not rule out biliary atresia. Other imaging techniques with direct opacification of the biliary tree combined with percutaneous liver biopsy have roles in equivocal cases. Magnetic resonance cholecystopancreatography and hepatobiliary scintigraphy are not useful for the diagnosis of biliary atresia. We propose a decisional flowchart for biliary atresia diagnosis based on ultrasound signs, including elastography, percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and liver biopsy.


## Introduction

Biliary atresia is an important cause of obstructive jaundice in infants causing progressive fibrosis and obliteration of extrahepatic and intrahepatic bile ducts and resulting in biliary cirrhosis in the absence of early surgery. Jaundice with pale stools and dark urine is present within the first days or weeks of life. The prevalence of biliary atresia ranges from one in five thousand to one in twenty thousand worldwide depending on the geographic area, with the highest prevalence in Taiwan. The aetiology of biliary atresia is unknown and different causes have been proposed including viral infections, genetic factors or toxins.

There are two forms of biliary atresia: the non-syndromic form, which accounts for about eighty percent of cases, and the syndromic form, also called biliary atresia splenic malformation syndrome, which accounts for about twenty percent of cases. The syndromic form is associated with polysplenia, intestinal malrotation, preduodenal portal vein, interrupted inferior vena cava, aberrant hepatic artery, abdominal heterotaxia and congenital heart disease. There are also different subtypes of biliary atresia according to the extent of fibrosis in extrahepatic bile ducts and the presence of a cyst of the extrahepatic bile duct. In all cases, intrahepatic bile ducts are fibrotic, which explains the absence of bile duct dilatation despite a biliary obstacle. The histology is characterized by bile duct proliferation, bile plugs, portal or perilobular fibrosis, oedema and the preservation of the basic hepatic lobular architecture. Histology is not specific and disorders such as parenteral nutrition-associated cholestasis, cystic fibrosis and alpha one antitrypsin deficiency may mimic biliary atresia. Liver biopsy specimens obtained before six weeks of age could be indistinguishable from neonatal hepatitis. If left untreated, patients with biliary atresia will die within the first years of life from complications of biliary cirrhosis and end-stage liver disease.

The primary treatment for biliary atresia is the Kasai hepatoportoenterostomy, which consists of resecting the choledocal remnants, gallbladder and portal plate and constructing a jejunal Roux-en-Y anastomosis (Kasai procedure) or cholecystostomy to restore biliary drainage. If biliary atresia patients have surgery within the first sixty days of life, bile flow can be established in seventy percent of cases; patients who have surgery after ninety days of life achieve sufficient bile flow only in twenty percent of cases. Liver transplantation is performed if primary Kasai hepatoportoenteostomy fails or in case of delayed diagnosis with advanced cirrhosis that contraindicates Kasai surgery. Rapid diagnosis at the onset of symptoms is the main goal of imaging considering the paramount importance of early surgical treatment.

Differentiating biliary atresia from other nonsurgical causes of neonatal cholestasis is challenging. Gamma glutamyl transpeptidase is an important biomarker in the differential diagnosis of neonatal cholestasis showing higher levels in children with biliary atresia than in those without biliary atresia. Ultrasound, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography, hepatobiliary scintigraphy, liver percutaneous biopsy, percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography are used in the work-up for biliary atresia, but surgery with intraoperative cholangiography and biopsy is the only reference standard for diagnosis.

We divided our results in two linked papers. In part one, we discussed the prenatal ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging diagnosis and the early postnatal ultrasound findings. In this second part, we discuss the role of magnetic resonance cholecystopancreatography, nuclear medicine, percutaneous biopsy, percutaneous cholecystocholangiography and risk scores. Based on this literature review and discussions within the European Society of Paediatric Radiology Abdominal Taskforce, both via emails and during plenary sessions, a suggested diagnostic pathway for patients with suspected biliary atresia is proposed as a consensus statement from the European Society of Paediatric Radiology.


## Systematic review

The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses statement was applied to this review. In December twenty nineteen, two of the authors, both with sixteen years of experience, independently and systematically searched on PubMed all articles published from January nineteen ninety-nine to December one, twenty nineteen. Keywords included magnetic resonance imaging and biliary atresia, percutaneous cholecystocholangiography and biliary atresia, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and biliary atresia, percutaneous liver biopsy and biliary atresia, nuclear medicine and biliary atresia, biliary atresia and risk scores. The two readers in consensus selected eligible papers based on title and abstract. Only articles in English were considered for analysis. We matched author names and affiliations to avoid data duplication and we included only the most recent or complete study of the same authors including the same patients. No papers were dismissed due to the children's ages or the type of study.


## Imaging techniques

Magnetic resonance cholecystopancreatography

One hundred fifty-two studies were identified for initial review. On the basis of title or abstract, one hundred forty-one papers were excluded and eleven papers were identified as relevant.

A fast spin echo three-dimensional M R cholangiopancreatography is recommended with echo time six hundred to seven hundred milliseconds, repetition time one thousand five hundred to two thousand five hundred milliseconds (theoretical, dependent on respiratory gating), flip angle one hundred forty degrees and fat suppression using a one point five-tesla unit. Acquisitions are strictly coronal and almost isotropic to allow for non-distorted detection and assessment of the smaller structures. Real-time navigator gating is necessary to synchronize breathing. Field of view eighteen to twenty-four centimeters and acquisition matrix two hundred fifty-six by two hundred fifty-six are adequate. We suggest using a flexible surface coil according to the child's weight (minimum twelve channels).

Gentle swaddling and natural sleep or sedation are both possible options. We recommend the patient fast for at least four hours before the M R I and no digestive contrast.

The M R cholecystopancreatography diagnosis of biliary atresia was made on the basis of the non-visualization of the extrahepatic biliary tree or the non-visualization of the extrahepatic bile duct and gallbladder, also considering periportal thickening and high signal intensity in the porta hepatis on T two-weighted images. Other authors considered the non-visualization of the extrahepatic bile duct and gallbladder abnormalities.

The meta-analysis performed by He et al. included seven M R cholecystopancreatography studies (age range: one to fifteen days) for biliary atresia diagnosis reporting a sensitivity of eighty-nine point seven percent (range: eighty-four point eight percent to ninety-three point four percent), a specificity of sixty-four point seven percent (range: fifty-eight point zero percent to seventy-one point zero percent), a positive likelihood ratio of three point one zero (range: one point five nine to six point zero six), a negative likelihood ratio of zero point one six (range: zero point zero six to zero point four four) and a diagnostic odds ratio of thirty-two point four eight (range: eight point two two to one hundred twenty-eight point two nine).

Kim et al. used a conditional inference tree analysis to select discriminators for the diagnosis of biliary atresia. Visibility of the common bile duct, abnormality of the gallbladder and M R I triangular cord thickness were good discriminators for the diagnosis of biliary atresia. The M R I-based decision tree using these findings with M R I triangular cord thickness cutoff of five point one millimeters showed ninety-seven point three percent sensitivity, ninety-four point eight percent specificity and ninety-six point two percent accuracy, comparable to U S. M R I scans in this study were performed using sedation. This was a retrospective study with the possibility of bias. The authors did not assess the reproducibility of M R I triangular sign thickness and the baseline characteristics (gender and laboratory results) were different between the biliary atresia and non-biliary atresia groups. The proportion of patients with visible or dilated common bile duct on M R I in the non-biliary atresia group (ninety-four out of ninety-six, ninety-seven point nine percent) was much higher than in other studies because the authors included forty-two patients with choledochal cyst and partially visualized common bile duct in the visible common bile duct group, compared with previous studies that excluded these cases (mean age plus or minus standard deviation in the biliary atresia group fifty-nine point three plus or minus thirty point two days and in the non-biliary atresia group fifty-seven point nine plus or minus forty-three point one days).

millimeters porta hepatis microcyst (black arrow) inside periportal thickening with high signal intensity (white arrow). A coronal T two-weighted thick-slab single-shot turbo spin echo M R cholecystopancreatography shows a porta hepatis microcyst (black arrow), a small gallbladder (white arrow) and the non-visualization of extrahepatic biliary tree

According to Siles et al., non-enhanced MR cholecystopancreatography visualization of the entire extrahepatic bile duct system, including confluence of intrahepatic bile ducts, is possible but was only observed in sixty-two point five percent of neonates and infants younger that three months in a normal physiological state. For infants younger than thirty days, this result dropped to fifty percent. This compromises the ability of MR cholecystopancreatography to exclude the diagnosis of biliary atresia at the optimal time for surgery.


## Hepatobiliary scintigraphy

Hepatobiliary scintigraphy uses Technetium ninety-nine m-labelled iminodiacetic acid derivatives as a radiotracer. Patient preparation for imaging should include phenobarbital to activate liver excretory enzymes and increase bile flow for a minimum of three to five days before the hepatobiliary imaging study. Scintigraphy can exclude biliary atresia by demonstrating transit of radiotracer into the bowel. Cholescintigraphic images should be acquired at multiple times up to twenty-four hours.

A meta-analysis by Kianifar et al. included eighty-one studies reporting a sensitivity of ninety-nine point three percent, a specificity of seventy-five point one percent, a positive likelihood ratio of three point one nine, a negative likelihood ratio of zero point zero seven, and a diagnostic odds ratio of sixty point one. The negative predictive value was high, about one hundred percent, but the positive predictive value was lower and false-positive results occurred in some patients with severe medical cholestasis. In hepatobiliary scintigraphy studies, renal or urinary excretion of the tracer could be confused with transit of radiotracer into the bowel and lead to a false-negative result.


## Percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography

Seven percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography studies were identified for initial review. Four were identified as relevant. Percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography is a US-guided technique performed under general anaesthesia or sedation with local anaesthesia. A twenty-two to twenty-five-gauge needle is used to puncture the gallbladder through the liver parenchyma and inject a nonionic contrast medium to obtain a cholangiogram. Antibiotic prophylaxis is usually given. Bile aspiration, when the gallbladder is distended enough, allows for sampling of bile for biochemical studies in suspected genetic cholestasis. The decision to perform a percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography is informed by case-by-case discussion. If the gallbladder is visible, one may try to puncture it, while acknowledging the risk involved. Lee et al. reported no complications related to percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography and obtained a technical success in eighteen of twenty-two procedures. Percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography has a spatial resolution higher than MR cholecystopancreatography and allows observation of the direct progression of the iodine in the biliary tract. It is useful to confirm or rule out biliary atresia in difficult cases. The absence of retrograde filling of contrast in the intrahepatic bile ducts is highly suggestive of biliary atresia. In some cases of biliary atresia, there is a very thin and irregular opacification of the intrahepatic bile ducts and no opacification of the duodenum. In non-biliary atresia cholestasis, opacification of intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts and duodenum is always seen. Some typical patterns may allow differential diagnosis, such as in neonatal sclerosing cholangitis. Percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography can of tracer to the intestine excludes biliary atresia. A seventy-seven-day-old boy with biliary atresia. Hepatobiliary scintigraphy with an eight by five matrix, two minutes per image with the first eighty minutes after injection of ninety-nine Technetium-mebrofenin, shows retention of tracer within the liver parenchyma and no visible gallbladder or excretion of tracer into the intestine. Image courtesy of Dr. Jan G. Fjeld, Oslo University Hospital.

determine the type of biliary atresia and gallbladder patency. Zhou et al. proposed percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography by using contrast-enhanced US in infants suspected of having biliary atresia with equivocal US findings and a gallbladder longer than one point five centimeters. This is an interesting pilot study in which biliary atresia was diagnosed in four patients and excluded in five patients without procedural-related complications. However, further studies are necessary to evaluate the diagnostic performance and limits of this technique. It is noteworthy that the technique can be performed only when a gallbladder lumen is accessible.


## Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography

Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed to evaluate the patency of the biliary tree in the diagnosis of biliary atresia in some tertiary referral centres. Full delineation of the biliary system excludes biliary atresia. Another sign includes the absence or presence of bile at the site of the papilla. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography requires specific infant endoscopy equipment not available at many centres; it is usually performed under general anaesthesia. The endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography sensitivity ranges between eighty-six percent and one hundred percent, with the specificity seventy-nine to ninety-four percent, positive predictive value eighty-eight to ninety-six percent and negative predictive value one hundred percent.


## Percutaneous liver biopsy

Percutaneous liver biopsy is performed in most paediatric centres during the diagnostic work-up of infants with cholestatic jaundice. The diagnosis is challenging because the histological features of many disorders causing infantile cholestasis overlap, evolve and vary with age. The diagnostic accuracy of liver biopsy for biliary atresia diagnosis is between sixty percent and ninety-five percent. We have analyzed studies with liver biopsy as the only method for diagnosis. The earliest histological changes of biliary atresia might be relatively nonspecific, and biopsies performed too early in the course of the disease might result in a false-negative result. In a meta-analysis, including thirty-eight papers, the sensitivities and specificities of individual studies varied from ninety percent to one hundred percent and from eighty-four percent to one hundred percent, respectively. The percutaneous liver biopsy showed pooled sensitivity of ninety-eight percent, specificity of ninety-three percent, positive likelihood ratio of twelve point zero nine and negative likelihood ratio of zero point zero three. The positive predictive value was ninety-three percent and the negative predictive value was ninety-seven point seven percent.

In a meta-analysis, twenty-two articles were included; the pooled accuracy of preoperative liver biopsy was ninety-one point seven percent, with a sensitivity of ninety-one point two percent, specificity of ninety-three percent, positive predictive value of ninety-one point two percent, negative predictive value of ninety-two point five percent and accuracy of ninety-one point six percent.

A large multicentre study addressed histopathological features of liver biopsies that distinguish biliary atresia from other causes of infantile cholestasis. They found a diagnostic accuracy of the needle biopsy of ninety point one percent, whereas sensitivity and gallbladder and cystic and common bile ducts with no reflux in intrahepatic bile ducts. A six-week-old girl with neonatal sclerosing cholangitis. Percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography in a PA projection shows a normal gallbladder, and a cystic duct, choledochus and reflux in very irregular and thin intrahepatic bile ducts.

specificity for biliary atresia were eighty-eight point four percent and ninety-two point seven percent, respectively. This study revealed large variability in the severity of histological changes in biliary atresia; for example, bile duct proliferation was absent in as many as twenty-two point eight percent of biliary atresia cases and bile duct/ductular plugs were absent in twenty-five percent of biliary atresia cases. Histological features of biliary atresia also overlapped with non-biliary atresia cases; more than forty percent of the latter had some degree of bile ductular reaction and bile plugs were present in fifteen percent. According to these data, percutaneous liver biopsy cannot exclude biliary atresia. The general reported complication rate of US-guided percutaneous liver biopsy ranges from one point seven percent and four point six percent but has not been reported in this specific population.


## Risk scores

Differentiation of biliary atresia from other nonsurgical causes of neonatal cholestasis is challenging so a diagnostic risk score is desirable. We searched for biliary atresia risk score papers in the literature including all imaging techniques.

Kim et al. used both clinical gestational age at birth and imaging criteria triangular cord thickness at US, gallbladder structure at US, hepatobiliary scan findings to develop a risk score for biliary atresia that stratifies patients in a low-risk group in which liver biopsy may be postponed, an intermediate-risk group in which liver biopsy can be considered and a high-risk group in which prompt liver biopsy with or without intraoperative cholangiography should be considered. There are concerns about Kim et al.'s risk score. First, hepatobiliary scintigraphy causes a diagnostic delay of one week five days for preparation with phenobarbital and two days for the examination - we need twenty-four-hour delayed imaging and it is not recommended because of its limited specificity. According to Kim et al.'s risk score, a full-term birth infant with triangular cord sign and gallbladder abnormalities has only a fifteen point eight eight percent probability of biliary atresia. This is not in agreement with the very high sensitivity and specificity of the combination of triangular cord sign and gallbladder abnormalities reported in the first part of our meta-analysis eighty-seven percent, ninety percent and ninety-nine percent, respectively. According to those results, this infant has a very high probability of having biliary atresia. Kim et al.'s risk score underweights the role of an optimized US scan. In that paper, US was performed after a two-hour fast, which in our opinion is too short. The US criteria did not include signs such as micro- or macrocyst or syndromic presentation. In Kim et al.'s strategy, biopsy is indicated in the high-risk group, but we consider it more important to do a cholangiography than a biopsy, according to the results of our review. We agree that the high-risk group should get a cholangiography and a biopsy and that the low-risk group can be monitored by close follow-up according to the age. However, our major concern with these results is that they give no answer to how to handle the patients with intermediate fifteen point eight eight to fifty-nine point nine nine percent risk of biliary atresia.

El-Guindi et al. used stool color (clay), US signs (triangular cord sign, contractile gallbladder, gallbladder length greater than or equal to twenty point five millimeters, hepatic artery diameter greater than or equal to two point zero five millimeters, hepatic artery diameter/portal vein diameter greater than or equal to zero point four four five millimeters, hepatic subcapsular flow), laboratory tests and histopathology to develop a twelve-parameter diagnostic score to discriminate biliary atresia from other causes of neonatal cholestasis, reporting a sensitivity and specificity of one hundred percent each. The main concern is the reproducibility of these measurements and of this diagnostic score; Macaluso et al., applying the same diagnostic score to their population, obtained less encouraging results: global sensitivity was thirty-one percent with a specificity of ninety point nine percent.

Chen et al. developed a noninvasive algorithm to identify biliary atresia in cholestasis using five predictors (shear wave speed greater than one point three five meters per second, triangular cord sign, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, abnormal gallbladder and clay stool). They divided patients into three risk groups and achieved high diagnostic performance (sensitivity of ninety-eight point seven percent and specificity of ninety-one point four percent) in the high and intermediate risk groups.


## Discussion

According to this analysis, MR cholecystopancreatography has no role in the diagnosis of biliary atresia mainly because of the absence of visibility of the normal extrahepatic bile duct, considered a diagnostic criterion by most authors, is observed in almost forty percent of non-cholestatic neonates leading to low specificity. Moreover, MR cholecystopancreatography is more complex to perform than US and has lower diagnostic performance. This conclusion is in agreement with ESPGHAN

European Society for Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition and NASPGHAN North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition guidelines.

Concerning hepatobiliary scintigraphy, this analysis shows its very limited role in the diagnosis of biliary atresia because its specificity is very limited with false-positive results in patients presenting with severe medical cholestasis with very limited or even absent choleresis. This again is in agreement with ESPGHAN and NASPGHAN guidelines.

More invasive imaging techniques with direct opacification of the biliary tract using percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography have been evaluated and show good diagnostic performance. However, the use of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography is very limited by the need of specific endoscopic equipment with trained operators. Percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography has very good diagnostic performance to confirm or rule out biliary atresia in difficult cases.

Percutaneous liver biopsy remains an important but imperfect tool for the diagnosis of biliary atresia since histological biliary atresia features vary with time related to the evolution of the disease and may overlap with non-biliary atresia cholestatic diseases.

According to the results of our systematic review, parts one and two, and consensus of the ESPR Abdominal Taskforce, we proposed at the twenty nineteen ESPR annual meeting in Helsinki a biliary atresia decisional flowchart. In a neonate with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia with or without acholic stools, US should be the first imaging examination. The sufficient duration of fasting for US greater than four hours is of paramount importance, and we suggest repeating US on the same day after adequate fasting in doubtful cases. Gallbladder abnormalities, triangular cord sign, micro- or macrocyst, polysplenia, intestinal malrotation, preduodenal portal vein, interrupted inferior vena cava and abdominal heterotaxia have to be searched for and, if possible, elastography should be applied to assess liver stiffness. Dilated intrahepatic bile ducts can rule out biliary atresia. In an infant less than thirty days old with low clinical suspicion and normal US findings, we could consider repeating clinical examination, US and biological tests every week; if US findings are normal and cholestasis resolves, no further imaging is needed, but if cholestasis with acholic stools persists or occurs, percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography should be performed at the same time as liver biopsy. In cases of equivocal findings on US and very young patients with partially acholic stools, atypical patterns suggestive of medical causes or normal US findings and children between thirty and sixty days of age, we propose percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, according to local facilities, and liver biopsy. In cases of suggestive US liver findings and syndromic presentation or suggestive US liver findings and high clinical and biological suspicion, biliary opacification should be done under general anesthesia in the operating room and followed by surgical biopsy and a Kasai procedure if normal bile ducts are absent.

Our study has several limitations. The papers included a patient age range of three to three hundred sixty days, which is very large for an evolutive pathology that we must diagnose as early as possible, and it creates a real bias especially because some US signs (triangular cord sign and hilar cysts) are age dependent as are the results of liver biopsy. Patient characteristics among studies were different; for example, cystic forms of biliary atresia were excluded in some studies. There is a heterogeneity of study design and we included only English language papers.


## Conclusion

Early diagnosis of biliary atresia is of paramount prognostic importance and is the main goal of imaging. No single diagnostic test has an accuracy of one hundred percent and, because biliary atresia is a progressive disease, the diagnostic signs could have a late onset; hence, sensitivity and specificity will vary with age. Among imaging techniques, US has a high specificity, although a normal US examination does not rule out biliary atresia diagnosis. Other imaging techniques with direct opacification of the biliary tree associated with percutaneous liver biopsy have roles in doubtful cases. MR cholecystopancreatography and hepatobiliary scintigraphy have no role in diagnosing biliary atresia. According to the results of our systematic review parts one and two and consensus of the ESPR Abdominal Taskforce, we propose a decisional flowchart for biliary atresia diagnosis based on US signs, including elastography, percutaneous cholecysto-cholangiography or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and liver biopsy.


## Declarations

Conflicts of Interest None