## 877u-2024-09-03_20_13_34-replication.pdf

Annual Review of Virology Crowning Touches in Positive-Strand RNA Virus Genome Replication Complex Structure and Function


## Abstract

Positive-strand RNA viruses, the largest genetic class of eukaryotic viruses, include coronaviruses and many other established and emerging pathogens. A major target for understanding and controlling these viruses is their genome replication, which occurs in virus-induced membrane vesicles that organize replication steps and protect double-stranded RNA intermediates from innate immune recognition. The structure of these complexes has been greatly illuminated by recent cryo-electron microscope tomography studies with several viruses. One key finding in diverse systems is the organization of crucial viral RNA replication factors in multimeric rings or crowns that among other functions serve as exit channels gating release of progeny genomes to the cytosol for translation and encapsidation. Emerging results suggest that these crowns serve additional important purposes in replication complex assembly, function, and interaction with downstream processes such as encapsidation. The findings provide insights into viral function and evolution and new bases for understanding, controlling, and engineering positive-strand RNA viruses.


## One. INTRODUCTION

Positive-strand RNA viruses are one of the most numerous and devastating viral classes. Their members include severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus two, cause of the ongoing coronavirus disease twenty-nineteen pandemic, the tumor-inducing hepatitis C virus, paralytic poliovirus, lethal encephalitis and hemorrhagic fever viruses, and many other human, animal, and plant pathogens. In parallel, these viruses have demonstrated considerable potential for beneficial uses in medicine, biotechnology, and nanotechnology through their abilities to deliver, dramatically amplify, express, and evolve selected genes and RNA elements. The practical potential of such RNA pathways has become even more apparent with the recent successes of messenger RNA vaccines and increasingly numerous and powerful RNA-based tools for gene editing and regulation.

Better understanding of replication and pathogenesis is crucial to positive RNA virus control, to predicting the emergence of future dangerous viral species and variants, and to improving engineered uses of viral derivatives and pathways. One essential target for understanding, controlling, and employing positive RNA viruses is their genome replication. Such RNA replication invariably uses most of the viral genome coding capacity-for example, greater than seventy percent of the SARS-CoV-2 genome-and thus is arguably the main job of the virus. This positive RNA virus genome replication proceeds solely through RNA intermediates, without any natural DNA forms. In eukaryotes, these processes occur in virus-induced, membrane-bounded mini-organelles that organize RNA replication steps and protect double-stranded RNA replication intermediates from innate immune recognition. Two classes of such RNA replication complexes are known. The first, designated spherules, are approximately fifty- to one hundred fifty-nanometer invaginations of an intracellular membrane, whose interior remains connected to the cytosol by a necked channel. The second class consists of approximately two hundred- to three hundred-nanometer double-membrane vesicles or DMVs, which lack any membranous opening to the cytosol.

Prior ultrastructural knowledge of positive RNA virus replication complexes had been limited to their membrane architecture. Recent application of cryo-electron microscopy and complementary approaches to a few pioneer systems has greatly advanced understanding of these complexes and their functions by revealing the location, organization, and interactions of viral RNA templates, RNA replication proteins, and other relevant viral and cellular factors. In this review we summarize these and other recent breakthroughs in positive RNA virus genome replication and their implications for viral function and control. Major findings include that, in addition to enzymatic roles in viral RNA synthesis, positive RNA virus replication proteins have key structural roles in replication complexes. For both spherule and double-membrane vesicle replication complexes, these viral proteins form ringed complexes or crowns that among other functions serve as cytosolic exit channels for progeny positive RNA products. As outlined below, such crowns appear to represent a crucial nexus for many infection steps, from initial recruitment of RNA replication factors and templates through successive RNA replication functions, post-translational maturation steps, encapsidation, and host innate immune interactions. Ongoing analysis of these crowns promises to provide further valuable insights regarding replication complex structure, operation, assembly, and evolution.


## Two. SPHERULE RNA REPLICATION COMPLEXES

Below we introduce some general replication complex principles and emerging specifics of replication complexes employing spherule invaginations as RNA replication compartments, using several of the best-characterized examples among the many positive RNA viruses that employ this style of replication complex.


## Two point one. Nodaviruses

Nodaviridae infect vertebrates or invertebrates including insects and nematodes. Their genomes and spherule replication complexes bear similarities to the plant-infecting Tombusviridae. The associated nodavirus-tombusvirus clade was recently substantially expanded by viruses discovered through large-scale sequencing. Nodaviruses encode a single, highly multifunctional RNA replication factor, protein A, approximately one thousand amino acids, that contains RNA methyltransferase/capping, membrane association, RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, and multiple self-interaction domains. Advanced sequence comparisons show that protein A embodies three of the four domains conserved across the RNA replication proteins of the large alphavirus superfamily. In keeping with such expanding parallels, findings on nodavirus RNA replication and replication complexes often have provided precedents relevant to many positive RNA viruses.

Flock house virus is a particularly well-studied nodavirus and an increasingly advanced model for positive RNA virus genome replication and other processes. While Flock house virus virions are only infectious to insect cells, Flock house virus RNA replication, transcription, and virion assembly have been reproduced in all eukaryotic cells tested to date, including mammalian, plant, fungal, and nematode cells. Flock house virus thus provides a simple, well-characterized system for RNA-dependent RNA amplification in diverse cells, which as noted above could have many practical applications.

Two point one point one. Ultrastructure of nodavirus spherule RNA replication complexes. Nodavirus RNA replication occurs in spherular membrane invaginations on host mitochondria. Protein A is targeted to the outer mitochondrial membrane by an N-proximal mitochondrial transmembrane domain and further interacts with that membrane through sequences in its Iceberg region. This nodavirus Iceberg region has parallels to alphavirus RNA replication proteins in predicted structure and in primary sequence position relative to flanking protein domains, and is defined as a relatively large conserved structural extension to the capping enzyme core, reminiscent of the submerged part of an iceberg. Protein A also recruits Flock house virus genomic RNA templates to the outer mitochondrial membrane by interaction of its RNA-dependent RNA polymerase domain with cis signals that in Flock house virus genomic RNA one reside in nucleotides sixty-eight to two hundred five. In a process closely linked to RNA synthesis from such templates, protein A then induces invagination of the characteristic approximately sixty- to seventy-nanometer spherule vesicles of its replication complexes.

mitochondrial transmembrane domain (19) and further interacts with that membrane through se- quences in its Iceberg region (11, 21, 22) (Figure 2). This nodavirus Iceberg region has parallels to alphavirus RNA replication proteins in predicted structure and in primary sequence position relative to flanking protein domains (Figure 2), and is defined as a relatively large conserved struc- tural extension to the capping enzyme core, reminiscent of the submerged part of an iceberg (11). Protein A also recruits FHV genomic RNA templates to the outer mitochondrial membrane by interaction of its RdRp domain with cis signals that in FHV genomic RNA1 reside in nucleotides 68-205 (22, 23). In a process closely linked to RNA synthesis from such templates, protein A then induces invagination of the characteristic ~60- to 70-nm spherule vesicles of its RCs (24).

Classical electron microscopy tomography of FHV-infected Drosophila cells provided the first three-dimensional view of a positive RNA virus RC, confirming that all RC vesicles are continuous with the outer mitochondrial membrane, with a necked connection to the cytosol (Figure three a, left panel). Similarly, FHV-modified mitochondria provided the first three-dimensional cryo-electron microscopy analysis of positive RNA virus RCs, revealing the RC in a near-native state and yielding striking views of the RNA and protein components of RCs, in addition to membranes (Figure three a, right panel). Among other results, spherules are densely packed with coiled filaments, matching extensive biochemical evidence that they contain FHV double-stranded RNA replication intermediates. As with alphaviruses, spherule size correlates with the length of the RNA replicated, with RNA density calculations indicating that most FHV spherules contain one double-stranded RNA.

Two point one point two. Crown organization of viral RNA replication proteins at spherule necks. One stunning cryo-electron microscopy revelation was a twelve-fold symmetric, ringed, proteinaceous complex, designated the crown, above the cytosolic side of the spherule neck (Figure four a). Antibody labeling, volume calculations, and other results show that this crown consists largely if not solely of viral RNA replication protein A. Multiple advances resolved the nodavirus crown structure to approximately eight point five angstroms, revealing stacked rings of apical and basal lobes comprising a central turret with an interior floor and exterior legs. The crown interacts with the outer mitochondrial membrane both at the base of the central turret and at each leg, closely controlling the shape of the RC vesicle neck. Through these twelve-fold repeated interactions, the crown stabilizes the high-energy spherule structure against the high membrane curvature of the neck and electrostatic repulsion of the closely packed dsRNA. Crowns frequently are the origins of filaments that likely represent nascent progeny positive RNAs being exported into the cytosol. Below we outline recent findings that similar crown-like complexes of RNA replication factors are formed by alphaviruses and coronaviruses, suggesting that such features are widely conserved in positive RNA viruses.

Mapping a genetically engineered hexahistidine (His six) tag showed that the FHV crown apical lobe corresponds to the protein A RdRp domain. This accessible position appears consistent with the RdRp domain's roles in RNA template recruitment and potentially in negative-strand RNA synthesis, but less compatible with positive RNA synthesis due to its distance from the vesicle-bound dsRNA template. Thus, positive RNA synthesis might depend on an alternate protein A state with its RdRp domain deeper in the crown, either by bending of one or more crown apical lobes toward the vesicle or through an alternate form of protein A, as suggested by asymmetric electron-dense bodies often seen inside the crown turret. Further mapping of protein A's RNA capping and other domains within the crown should provide more powerful foundations for understanding and testing crown function and RC assembly and maturation.

Given these new revelations on FHV RC and crown structure, the tight linkage of FHV spherule formation to viral RNA synthesis suggests that the spherule RC may be formed during negative RNA synthesis by inflating the vesicle with the dsRNA product, like blowing up a balloon. A similar model was proposed among other alternatives for Semliki Forest alphavirus.


## Two point two. Alphavirus-Like Superfamily

The alphavirus-like superfamily of positive RNA viruses includes members that infect animals, insects, fungi, and plants, united by four conserved domains in their RNA replication proteins: an RNA MTase/capping domain, membrane-interactive Iceberg region, superfamily one NTPase/helicase, and RdRp. Through multiple phylogenetic interconnections, this alphavirus-like superfamily, the nodavirus-tombusvirus clade discussed above, and the flavivirus superfamily discussed below are now grouped together in phylum Kitrinoviricota, which represents approximately fifty percent of positive RNA viruses. This broad linkage underscores structural and functional parallels discussed here within and beyond this phylum.

Alphavirus RNA replication has best been studied for Semliki Forest virus and Sindbis virus, and increasingly for some more clinically important pathogens such as Chikungunya virus, also known as C H I K V. Alphaviruses encode a nonstructural polyprotein that is processed by a viral protease into nonstructural proteins (nsPs) one through four. nsP one contains the RNA MTase/capping domain, the Iceberg region, and a second membrane-associating region. nsP two has the NTPase/helicase, the protease, and a potential two-prime-O-MTase. nsP three has a macrodomain, zinc-binding domain, and hypervariable region. nsP four contains the RdRp domain. Alphavirus RNA replication occurs in characteristic sixty- to seventy-nanometer spherule vesicles that are induced on the plasma membrane and then, to degrees varying among different alphaviruses, are endocytosed into endosomal and lysosomal compartments.

Equivalent spherule RCs are induced by numerous plant-infecting alphavirus-like viruses. EM studies confirmed the same spherule architecture as for alphaviruses and provided particularly detailed views of spherule necks through freeze-fracture studies with turnip yellow mosaic virus. Evidence for spherules as the sites of viral RNA synthesis progressively accumulated from multiple viruses. For example, autoradiography mapped incorporated uridine three H to cytopathic vesicles bearing spherules, electron-dense fibrils inside spherules were identified as dsRNA, i.e., potential replication intermediates, by RNase sensitivity in low salt and dsRNA-specific antibodies, and bromine rUTP incorporation was mapped directly to spherules by EM immunogold labeling. Further details of spherule formation and function were revealed by brome mosaic virus, or B M V, studies showing that nsP one/nsP two-like B M V one a protein induces spherule formation, recruits genomic positive RNA through specific cis-signals to the spherule interior, and recruits nsP four-like B M V two a pol to synthesize first one negative RNA retained in the spherule and then many positive RNAs released to the cytosol.

Additional connections between alphavirus and nodavirus RCs emerged when cryo-EM single-particle analysis of C H I K V nsP one revealed an nsP one dodecamer ring. This nsP one dodecamer has been visualized to date from exogenously expressed, detergent-solubilized nsP one, and not in an alphavirus RC. Nevertheless, the parallel twelve-fold symmetry of crowns in active nodavirus RCs and conservation of the capping domain, Iceberg region, and polymerase domain between alphaviruses and nodaviruses suggests that the nsP one dodecamer likely forms the membrane-bound base of a larger crown also incorporating nsP two, nsP three, and the nsP four RdRp, and serves as a cytosolic export channel for progeny positive RNAs. One nsP one-nsP one dodecamer interface includes amphipathic detergent-binding projections, suggesting that oligomerization and membrane binding may be coupled. As in nodavirus crowns, nsP one's ordered contacts with lipids likely generate and stabilize the curvature of the membrane neck. Additionally, the nsP one MTase domain structure shares features with eukaryotic mRNA cap (guanine-N seven) MTase Ecm one, suggesting structural and mechanistic interpretations of alphavirus five prime RNA capping reactions involving m seven G T P methylation, m seven G M P - nsP one complex formation, and m seven GpppRNA formation.


## Two point three. Flaviviruses

A third class of positive RNA viruses forming spherule RCs are the Flaviviridae, which include major pathogens such as Zika, yellow fever, and dengue viruses. Flaviviruses encode a single polyprotein that is cleaved into three structural proteins and seven nonstructural N S RNA replication proteins. NS five contains the RdRp and RNA capping enzyme. NS three contains an RNA helicase/NTPase and the polyprotein processing protease. NS two A, NS two B, NS four A, and NS four B are membrane-spanning proteins that induce a continuous membrane network comprising vesicle packets, convoluted membranes, and virion assembly/budding sites.

Flavivirus-induced vesicle packets contain the viral RNA replication proteins, dsRNA, and nascent RNA and are the site of genome replication. Three-dimensional electron microscopy tomography showed vesicle packets to comprise a bounding membrane vesicle bearing multiple spherule invaginations retaining necked openings to the cytosol, confirming parallels noted in electron microscopy tomography of nodavirus spherules. The convoluted membranes contain replicase proteins but no RNA, and they may be sites for replication factor production and storage preparatory to RC formation.

While most Flaviviridae form spherule RCs, HCV induces some closed single-membrane vesicles and more double-membrane vesicles. Further features and evolutionary implications of these double-membrane vesicles are reviewed below.


## Three. DOUBLE-MEMBRANE VESICLE RNA REPLICATION COMPLEXES

In contrast to positive RNA viruses forming spherule RCs, RNA replication by some positive RNA viruses, including coronaviruses, picornaviruses, noroviruses, and hepaciviruses, is accompanied by formation of single- and double-membrane vesicles or tubules lacking membrane openings to the cytosol. For coronaviruses, double-membrane vesicles were recently established as the major sites of viral RNA synthesis, while for other viruses in this category the respective relevance of single- and double-membrane compartments for RNA replication remains less clear. Below we briefly review these results and their implications.


## Three point one. Coronaviruses

Coronaviruses and in particular the beta-coronaviruses are important human and animal pathogens. They include the causal agents of the prior severe acute respiratory syndrome and Middle East respiratory syndrome epidemics and the current devastating COVID-19 pandemic. Coronaviruses have approximately thirty-kilobase genomes, the largest known genomes among positive RNA viruses. Over seventy percent of these genomes encode enormous, overlapping la and lab polyproteins that are essential for RNA replication and for coronaviruses' unusual discontinuous subgenomic mRNA transcription. These polyproteins are processed by two virus-encoded proteases into sixteen individual nonstructural proteins providing functions in RNA replication organelle formation plus enzymatic functions such as protease, RNA dependent RNA polymerase, RNA capping, helicase, exonuclease, and endonuclease. The structures of many nonstructural proteins have been solved, but how they collectively interact for RNA synthesis and export remains a question.

Proteins nsp3, 4, and 6 each have multiple membrane-association domains and induce a network of interconnected, endoplasmic reticulum-derived membrane rearrangements including complex convoluted membranes and hundreds of two hundred- to three hundred-nanometer double-membrane vesicles. While viral RNA replication proteins are observed throughout this network, dsRNA is found only in double-membrane vesicles. Moreover, autoradiography of actinomycin-D-resistant tritium-uridine incorporation in coronavirus-infected cells identified double-membrane vesicles as the dominant if not sole sites of coronavirus RNA synthesis. Double-membrane vesicles arise approximately two hours postinfection. Their outer membranes are often interconnected through neck-like channels to other double-membrane vesicles and to convoluted membranes. Convoluted membranes arise later than double-membrane vesicles and, unlike double-membrane vesicles, do not harbor RNA. However, they abundantly immunolabel for coronavirus nonstructural proteins and, analogous to similar flavivirus-induced structures, could be sites for replicase production, processing, and storage.

A long-elusive path for the potential release of viral RNA products from DMV interiors was provided when cryo-EM tomography revealed a sixfold symmetrical pore that spans both DMV membranes and contains nsp3, the largest coronavirus RNA replication factor. This coronavirus channel or crown parallels the crowns previously recognized on spherule RCs in being a ringed complex of viral RNA replication factors that gates cytosolic release of viral RNA products and may assist in guiding their synthesis. Both the cytosolic and luminal portions of this coronavirus crown appear to interact with other viral and cellular factors. Potential luminal interactions with other viral RNA synthesis factors could help to coordinate synthesis and release of RNA replication and transcription products. On the crown's cytosolic side, nsp3's ubiquitin-like N terminus interacts with viral RNA and nucleocapsid protein, greatly enhancing RNA replication, likely by facilitating RNA delivery to the RC. As addressed below, in later infection these same nsp3/nucleocapsid interactions may guide encapsidation of progeny genomic RNA.


## Three point two. Picornaviruses, Hepaciviruses, and Noroviruses

Picornaviruses are a large family of human and animal viruses that include poliovirus; rhinoviruses A, B, and C; hepatitis A virus; and many others. Like flaviviruses, picornaviruses express a single polyprotein processed by virus-encoded proteases into structural and nonstructural proteins. The nonstructural RNA replication proteins include the two A protease and three C protease, two C NTPase, RNA synthesis primer three B V P g, and three D Pol Rd Rp. Domains conserved with two C NTPase, three B/V P g primer, three C protease, and three D Pol are shared by a superfamily of picornavirus-like viruses spanning vertebrate, invertebrate, and plant hosts. Within this superfamily, the functions of these conserved domains and RNA replication generally have been studied best in poliovirus.

Membrane association of picornavirus RNA replication proteins is mediated through two B, two C, and three A, which are sufficient to induce DMVs. Picornavirus-infected cells undergo extensive reorganization of ER, Golgi, and lysosomal membranes to initially produce single-membrane-bounded tubules that are progressively converted into double-membrane or multi-lamellar structures by flattening, curving, and fusing single-membrane tubules. Viral RNA replication proteins, dsRNA, and, most importantly, Br-rUTP labeling of newly synthesized RNA were all associated with both single- and double-membrane structures, suggesting that the nature of active picornavirus RCs may be dynamic. A possible picornavirus connection to coronavirus crowns is suggested by features of viral protein two C: Like coronavirus crown constituent nsp3, picornavirus two C is a crucial, conserved RNA replication factor that binds membranes, helps to induce DMV formation, and forms hexamers.

As noted above, HCV differs from most spherule RC-forming Flaviviridae in generating some closed single-membrane vesicles, particularly early in infection, and larger numbers of approximately one hundred fifty- to three hundred-nanometer DMVs later in infection. As with coronaviruses and picornaviruses, HCV DMVs appear linked with RNA replication because their emergence matches RNA replication kinetics, they label with antibodies to dsRNA, and they are induced by and contain HCV RNA replication factor NS5A. As considered further below, the ability of similar Flaviviridae genomes to give rise to either spherule RCs (dengue virus and other flaviviruses) or DMV RCs (HCV) has potential implications for the structural, functional, and potentially evolutionary relation of spherules and DMVs.

Finally, similar to picornaviruses and hepaciviruses, noroviruses induce a progression from ER-linked single-membrane to double-membrane and even multi-lamellar vesicles. Similar structures were induced by norovirus nonstructural protein NS4 and modulated by NS1-2 and NS3. Further work is needed to define the functions of these varied compartments in norovirus replication.


## Four. FURTHER MECHANISTIC IMPLICATIONS

Four point one. Functional Parallels and Potential Evolutionary Links Across Viruses

The RC findings summarized here reveal parallels among and beyond positive RNA viruses, suggesting or in some cases enriching potential underlying evolutionary connections. Spherule and DMV RCs were previously viewed as disparate structures, but the presence of crown-like rings of viral RNA replication proteins serving as product RNA release channels provides unifying links between them. As shown in Figure Four, the topological similarity or difference between these structures ultimately reduces to the detailed contacts of each crown with two membrane sheets: for spherules, the outer organellar membrane and inner vesicle membrane; for DMVs, the outer and inner vesicle membranes. While interpretive schematics such as Figure Four tend to emphasize continuity of the membranes interacting with nodaviral crowns on spherule RCs and separation of membranes interacting with coronavirus crowns on DMVs, these membranes may not be purely continuous or discontinuous in either structure. In particular, the spherule membranes interacting with nodavirus crowns are heavily disrupted by insertion of the crown's hydrophobic anchors, such that many lipids interact with crown proteins rather than other lipids. Similarly, for coronavirus crowns, as imaging resolution advances it will be of great interest to determine if interactions with crown proteins lead to any approach or contact between lipids in the inner and outer membranes.

Crown structures embodying such mixed lipid-lipid and lipid-protein interactions at crown-membrane interfaces might represent evolutionary intermediates linking positive RNA viruses employing spherule and DMV RCs. As noted earlier, one such evolutionary connection appears implicit within the Flaviviridae because flaviviruses and hepaciviruses use highly similar suites of RNA replication genes to generate spherules and DMVs, respectively. Further similar connections seem likely to emerge as phylogenetic gaps are filled by accelerating virus discovery.

At a higher level, similarities have been noted between intracellular positive RNA virus RCs and certain types of virions. Most notably, positive RNA virus RCs parallel the cores of dsRNA virus and retrovirus virions: Through these structures, each virus replicates its genome through an mRNA intermediate that is sequestered with its polymerase in a virus-induced membrane or protein compartment for negative-strand synthesis.

Particularly extensive parallels exist between genome replication in positive sense RNA virus RCs and double-stranded RNA viruses. The pathways and positive sense RNA slash double-stranded RNA replication intermediates appear identical. Indeed, positive sense RNA and double-stranded RNA virus life cycles are differentiated primarily by which replication intermediate is packaged in virions: positive sense RNA slash mRNA for positive sense RNA viruses, and the entire double-stranded RNA-containing RNA replication compartment or core for double-stranded RNA viruses. Positive sense RNA virus RC crowns also show intriguing parallels with ringed viral protein channels at the fivefold vertices of double-stranded RNA virus cores. Cystoviruses such as double-stranded RNA bacteriophage six assemble procapsids whose fivefold axes each bear an exterior hexamer of viral N T Pase P four. Similar to emerging models of nodavirus RC assembly, these P four hexamers serve as portals for active import of positive sense RNA genome templates and passive release of progeny positive sense RNA transcripts. Coronavirus DMVs also parallel these six capsids in bearing multiple hexameric crowns that are thought to serve as progeny RNA release channels and might serve as RNA template import channels.

Reoviruses, another family of double-stranded RNA viruses, have cores whose fivefold axes bear pentameric turrets that serve as release channels and five prime capping complexes for viral mRNAs. The viral protein A that forms nodavirus crowns also contains the viral RNA capping functions and may also five prime cap emerging nodavirus RNAs. Finally, paralleling the twelve-fold symmetry of nodavirus crowns, herpesviruses and many DNA bacteriophage use twelve-mer ringed portal protein complexes as import motors and release channels for their genomic DNA. Thus, positive sense RNA virus crowns share features with proteins from a wide range of viruses, which might represent links with common ancestors contributing to the evolution of crowns.


## Four point two. Dynamic Maturational Transitions of RNA Replication Complexes

Results from many positive sense RNA viruses indicate that RCs are dynamic complexes that undergo sequential maturational changes and interact with a progression of viral and host interaction partners. Alphaviruses, for example, transition their RCs from negative sense RNA to positive sense RNA synthesis by viral N S P two protease processing of their N S P one two three four polyprotein. In an early step required for RNA synthesis, N S P two releases N S P fourpol from N S P one two three four during or immediately after polyprotein translation. The resulting N S P one two three and N S P fourpol complex is specialized for negative sense RNA synthesis, which as with nodaviruses is linked to spherule formation. Subsequently, negative sense RNA synthesis is inhibited and positive sense RNA synthesis promoted by cleavages that separate first N S P one from N S P two three, and then N S P two from N S P three. The timing of N S P one slash two cleavage appears optimized to allow conformational adjustments of N S P dash N S P interactions required for subsequent steps, including N S P two slash three cleavage.

This alphavirus polyprotein processing takes on new meaning with the finding that N S P one assembles a twelve-mer ring that likely serves as a base for at least early N S P one two three and N S P one two three four complexes. Such high copy N S P one two three four multimers would have similarities to the twelve-fold symmetric, multi-domain nodavirus crowns and intriguing implications for functional issues such as intra- and intermolecular cleavages by N S P two and the need to proteolytically release N S P fourpol for RNA synthesis.

Further indication of RC maturational changes emerged from recognition that alphavirus-like viruses, flaviviruses, and other Kitrinoviricota exploit cellular oxidizing functions to enable later aspects of positive sense RNA synthesis including RNA five prime capping. Antioxidant treatment or knockdown of specific oxidases inhibits genome replication by BMV, red clover necrotic mosaic virus, alphaviruses, and flaviviruses. Conversely, oxidant treatment in vitro or overexpression of specific oxidases in vivo enhances five prime RNA capping by the relevant viral capping enzymes. Disulfide-linked viral RNA capping protein multimers are formed in flavi- and alpha-like virus infections, and their abundance correlates with such oxidant-dependent capping activation.

How viral RNA capping enzymes could access cellular oxidants was initially unclear because these oxidants are compartmentalized within organellar lumens, while the relevant RCs are spherules that connect via their membrane necks and crowns to the highly reduced cytosol. Recent studies showed that BMV RNA replication protein one a, whose multiple functions include RNA capping, permeabilizes the E R membranes on which BMV spherule RCs form, locally oxidizing the adjacent cytosol. The effects of one a mutations and other results suggest that this oxidation induces a one a-one a disulfide-linked complex whose conformational changes activate one's RNA capping functions. These studies also mapped one's membrane-permeabilizing or viroporin functions to an amphipathic alpha-helix conserved among alpha-like viruses. Because flavivirus N S two and picornavirus two B also permeabilize intracellular membranes, members of all three positive sense RNA virus superfamilies have RNA replication factors with viroporin activity, whose release of oxidizing potential or other small molecules from secretory or organellar lumens may regulate later steps in RNA replication.


## Four point three. Multiple RNA Replication Complex Outputs: Genomic RNAs, Subgenomic Messenger RNAs, and Recombination

The R C s of most positive RNA viruses host multiple processes such as replicating different RNAs of multicomponent genomes, genomic and subgenomic RNA synthesis, and RNA recombination. Growing understanding of R C structure and compartmentalization enables more effective consideration of how these processes are regulated and whether individual R C s might be specialized for particular pathways or RNA templates.

To express additional proteins from internal open reading frames, many positive RNA viruses produce subgenomic mRNAs corresponding to five prime truncated fragments of viral genomic positive RNA. For B M V (Figure two), and by inference other alphavirus-like viruses, in vitro and in vivo results show that subgenomic mRNAs are synthesized by positive RNA initiation at alternate internal promoters on a full-length genomic negative RNA template. While many regulatory questions remain, mutual interference between B M V genomic and subgenomic RNA synthesis suggests that both pathways may proceed on a common genomic negative RNA template in a single spherule R C.

For nodaviruses and coronaviruses (Figure two), subgenomic RNAs are generated by terminating negative RNA synthesis at interior sites on genomic positive RNA templates, yielding truncated or internally deleted negative RNAs that become independent replicons. For both viruses, subgenomic negative RNA production depends on defined RNA sequences, structures, and long-range RNA interactions. However, the precise conditions triggering premature termination of negative RNA synthesis and regulating relative levels of full-length genomic and partial-length subgenomic negative RNAs remain poorly understood.

It is also unknown whether individual coronavirus or nodavirus R C s contain only one or more types of genomic or subgenomic RNA templates. For coronavirus D M Vs, the presence of multiple crowns per D M V and the apparently lower density of double-stranded RNA intermediates relative to spherules (Figure three c) suggest that individual D M Vs might host multiple genomic and/or subgenomic RNA templates, with either transient or more durable associations with specific crowns. For spherule R C s, volume measurements and the presence of a single crown suggest that most spherules contain a single double-stranded RNA replication intermediate. However, nodavirus genomic RNA2 replication both requires and subsequently suppresses synthesis of subgenomic R N A three from genomic RNA1. Thus, either some of these three replicatively interdependent RNAs are produced in a single spherule or the templates and products of their replication must interact between R C s.

Positive RNA virus RNA recombination, which is crucial for short-term adaptation and long-term evolution, appears to occur primarily by template switching during RNA replication and thus within R C s. Accordingly, B M V recombination requires both parental RNAs to possess signals for recruitment into R C s, and recruiting two templates into a single R C may be the limiting factor for recombination.


## Four point four. Connection of Virion Assembly to RNA Replication

For many positive RNA viruses, genome RNA synthesis shows close physical and functional links to virion assembly. For coronaviruses, for example, virion assembly and budding sites are usually closely juxtaposed with D M V R C s producing new viral genomic RNAs (Figure three c). Coronavirus R C s and encapsidation are further linked by interaction of the cytosolic domains of R C crowns with clustered densities similar to virion ribonucleoproteins and by crown protein n s p three binding of viral nucleocapsid N, implying that n s p three-N interaction might initiate encapsidation of progeny RNAs as they are released from crowns.

Flavivirus virions also assemble and bud near their genome replication sites (Figure three b). For both flaviviruses and hepaciviruses, multiple R C-associated nonstructural proteins are linked to virion assembly. In particular, flavivirus N S two A and hepacivirus N S two are key organizers of virion assembly, promoting recruitment, localization, and function of multiple viral factors at virion assembly sites jointly associated with lipid droplets and E R. In addition to N S two A, flavivirus nonstructural proteins implicated in virion assembly include at least N S two B and N S three, while implicated H C V proteins include N S two plus N S one/P seven, N S three, N S four A, and N S five A, establishing multiple potentially guiding connections between the machineries of progeny RNA and virion production.

In nodavirus infection, large arrays of unenveloped virions accumulate directly adjacent to infection-modified mitochondria bearing R C s, and several results illustrate functional coupling between these processes. First, nodavirus genomic RNA1 and RNA2 are only efficiently encapsidated by capsid protein translated from RNA2 synthesized by nodaviral RNA-dependent RNA replication in mitochondrial R C s, but not by capsid protein supplied in trans from non-replicating mRNA transcribed from baculovirus DNA. Moreover, an arginine-rich motif near the capsid protein N terminus is selectively required to encapsidate genomic RNA1 but not RNA2, largely because this domain localizes capsid protein to the mitochondrial sites of RNA replication. Thus, for all of these viruses, virion assembly and RNA replication are linked by multiple pathways whose mechanistic principles are still incompletely understood but promise to be quite enlightening.


## Four point five. Opportunities for Improved Virus Control

With genome replication at the heart of positive RNA virus life cycles, R C assembly, maturation, and function are prime targets for antiviral strategies. Because natural positive RNA virus infections typically start at low multiplicity, the incoming single-stranded RNA genome (Figure P left l a right) is highly vulnerable to normal cellular RNA turnover prior to RNA replication. Thus, merely slowing R C assembly can have dramatic antiviral effects. In addition to attractive potentials for targeting viral replication factor synthesis, stability, trafficking, and assembly, R C assembly might be inhibited by targeting relevant host factors. While space does not allow general review here of the myriad host factor requirements for positive R N A virus replication, some examples are instructive. Host pathways involved in lipid synthesis, modification, and trafficking are prominent illustrations of potential targets because most or all positive R N A viruses depend on and recruit such functions to R C assembly sites. Similarly, R C generation by many positive R N A viruses requires host membrane remodeling factors such as E S C R T proteins, reticulons, and others. Because these and many other host pathways are used by numerous positive R N A viruses, targeting well-selected factors could provide valuable broad-spectrum antiviral effects.

After RNA replication starts, eukaryotic innate immune defenses that recognize positive RNA virus double-stranded RNA include RNA interference and multiple pattern recognition receptors. As expected from their structure, positive RNA virus replication complexes strongly sequester viral double-stranded RNA from interaction with such extravesicular factors. Innate immune responses thus might be initiated primarily from rare aberrant replication complexes whose misassembly or other defects render double-stranded RNAs accessible. Accordingly, treatments that increase defective replication complex production might greatly accelerate and stimulate innate immune responses. Intriguingly, crown components SARS-CoV nonstructural protein three and Chikungunya virus nonstructural protein one bind and antagonize innate immune recognition and signaling factors MDA5 and cGAS-STING, suggesting that viral crowns might provide active as well as passive defenses against innate immunity.


## Five. Concluding Remarks

In just the past few years, the discovery of crowns in the replication complexes of several distinct viruses has begun to establish these intriguing, strategically placed complexes as critical features in the replication of many if not most positive RNA viruses. While the structure of these crowns is still being unraveled, their recognition is already providing foundations for resolving central questions of replication complex organization, assembly, and function that have been recognized for decades. The identification of crowns emerged from the convergence of revolutionary advances in molecular virology, cryo-EM imaging, and other areas, and these same trends promise accelerating future progress. Further structural and functional studies will undoubtedly provide important insights into multiple key mechanistic issues, many of which are posed above. In this age of heightened pandemic awareness, perhaps chief among these is how our increasing understanding of the machinery and functions of positive RNA virus genome replication and associated processes can best be translated into more effective and ideally more broadly active antiviral control strategies. Gratifyingly, emerging results already imply that dramatic new surprises and productive opportunities for research and applications will be in store as this exciting arena advances.


## Disclosure Statement

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.


## History

Opportunities, Technology, and the Joy of Discovery Patricia G. Spear


## Ecology and Evolution

Mark D. Stenglein


## The Ecology of Viral Emergence Edward C. Holmes one hundred seventy-three

Genome Replication, Regulation of Gene Expression, and Biosynthesis

Crowning Touches in Positive-Strand RNA Virus Genome Replication Complex Structure and Function Masaki Nishikiori, Johan A. den Boon, Nuruddin Unchwaniwala, and Paul Ahlquist one hundred ninety-three


## Pathogenesis

Citrus Tristeza Virus: From Pathogen to Panacea Svetlana Y. Folimonova and Yong-Duo Sun


## Advances in Understanding Neuropathogenesis of Rift Valley Fever Virus Kaleigh A. Connors and Amy L. Hartman

Immunity


## Vaccines

Errata