## Evidence for early asteroidal collisions prior to four point one five billion years ago from basaltic eucrite phosphate uranium-lead chronology

Article history: Received twenty-four March twenty twenty. Received in revised form nine July twenty twenty. Accepted twenty-three July twenty twenty. Available online twenty-six August twenty twenty. Editor: F. Moynier


## One. Introduction

Geological and geochemical records of the Earth-Moon system seem to indicate a surge in the impact flux at approximately three point nine billion years ago. Radiometric ages of multiple Apollo samples and lunar meteorites present a broad variation in ages with a peak at three point nine billion years ago. Some studies interpret cratering ages of the large lunar basins as concentrated between approximately four billion years ago and three point eight billion years ago


## ABSTRACT

The late heavy bombardment hypothesis, wherein the terrestrial planets are thought to have suffered intense collisions approximately three point nine billion years ago, is under debate. Coupled with new dynamical calculations, re-examination of geochronological data seem to support an earlier solar system instability and a smooth monotonic decline in impacts, as opposed to a "cataclysm." To better understand this collisional history, records from the asteroidal meteorites are required. Here, we report a uranium-lead chronological dataset for eucrite meteorites thought to originate from the asteroid four Vesta; this dataset indicates a continuous history of collisions prior to four point one five billion years ago. Our model ages of apatite and merrillite from three brecciated basaltic eucrites-Juvinas four thousand one hundred fifty point three plus or minus eleven point six million years ago (merrillite only), Camel Donga (disturbed around four thousand five hundred seventy to four thousand three hundred seventy million years ago), and Stannern four thousand one hundred forty-three point zero plus or minus twelve point five million years ago- record multiple thermal metamorphic events during the period of approximately four point four to four point one five billion years ago. We interpret this to mean that Vesta or the vestoid cluster underwent multiple impacts and moderate high-temperature reheating during this time. The ages of approximately four point four to four point one five billion years ago are distinctly younger than the initial magmatic process on Vesta (greater than four point five billion years ago) but are significantly older than a later "impact peak" based on some interpretations of forty argon-thirty-nine argon chronologies approximately three point nine to three point five billion years ago. The intense collisions prior to four point one five billion years ago on Vesta are at odds with the conventional late heavy bombardment hypothesis but not inconsistent with the much earlier bombardment and monotonic decline scenario. Different radiometric chronologies of the asteroid likely represent the different stages of a continual collisional process. Conversely, the model two hundred seven lead star divided by two hundred six lead star ages of apatite in the unbrecciated basaltic eucrite, Agoult, returned an age of four thousand five hundred twenty-four point eight plus or minus nine point six million years ago. This may represent slow cooling from an earlier global reheating of the crust on Vesta at four point five five billion years ago, as documented by other radiometric chronologies. The apatite in Juvinas recorded a coincident timing of four thousand five hundred sixteen point nine plus or minus ten point four million years ago, which could be due to either slow crustal cooling or impact. Twenty twenty The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license.

The late heavy bombardment hypothesis arose from such findings. Orbital migrations of Jupiter and the other giant planets, triggered by a massive early cometary disk in the trans-Neptunian region, may have caused the intense impacts within the inner solar system (Nice model). If such planetary migrations occurred at three point nine billion years ago, results like those from the late heavy bombardment model might be observed. Chronological data from various asteroidal meteorites, however, cast doubt on this interpretation. The alternative early instability scenario, where the earlier planetary migrations provoked inner solar system collisions that monotonically decreased over the next several hundreds of millions of years, seems to better explain the present data. Recent geochronology-based re-examinations provide timing constraints showing that the terrestrial planets suffered the intense bombardments at or before four point four eight billion years ago. Because most records on the terrestrial planets were overwritten by later internal and external processes, geochronologies of asteroids are valuable hints for understanding the ancient collisional history.

Asteroid Four Vesta is one of the largest rocky bodies in the main asteroid belt. The genetic linkage between Vesta (and its spectral resemblances, V-type asteroids) and howardite-eucrite-diogenite meteorites has been advocated based on petrographic studies of meteorites and telescopic observations of the asteroid since the nineteen sixties to nineteen seventies. Direct observations by the NASA Dawn Mission in twenty twelve further support the Vesta-HED relationship. As members of the HED clan, eucrites are basaltic or gabbroic crustal rocks primarily composed of low-calcium pyroxene, plagioclase, and minor amounts of silica minerals, sulfides, oxides, calcium phosphates, and rare zircons. Based on short-lived radiometric chronometers, previous studies have shown that the initial crystallization of basaltic eucrites occurred within a few million years after the formation of the solar system. Most of the basaltic eucrites experienced high-temperature (approximately nine hundred degrees Celsius) annealing. The uranium-lead and hafnium-tungsten ages of zircons in the basaltic eucrites vary from as old as approximately four thousand five hundred sixty-three to four thousand five hundred sixty-five million years ago to four thousand five hundred thirty million years ago, with a weighted mean uranium-lead age of four thousand five hundred fifty-four million years ago. The eucritic zircons are considered to have crystallized during the initial crust formation and/or the prolonged thermal processes on Vesta. An age of four thousand five hundred sixty-three plus or minus fifteen million years ago has also been reported in a mesosiderite, another meteoritical group that is expected to have a common origin with the HEDs (i.e., Vesta). After a suite of the early processes, most eucrites experienced complicated geologic events including (multiple cycles of) impact brecciation, reheating, and partial remelting. The forty argon-thirty-nine argon dating of various eucrites exhibits a large age variation from approximately four point five billion years to three point five billion years. Recent re-assessments of the forty argon-thirty-nine argon plateau ages indicate two groups: an earlier group with forty argon-thirty-nine argon plateau ages at approximately four point five zero billion years and a later group with ages at approximately three point eight five billion years. The earlier group may be associated with a large impact on Vesta that resulted in the formation of an ancient basin (possibly Veneneia). The timing of this basin-forming or related cataclysmic impact on Vesta has also been dated at four point five two to four point five three billion years by other chronological studies. The later argon-plateau ages, conversely, are interpreted either as clustering impacts during approximately three point eight five to three point four seven billion years or as an "end-tail" of ancient continuous collisions.

The uranium-lead chronology of calcium phosphates, such as apatite, is useful. Closure temperatures for radiometric chronometers are known to be quite high for the uranium-lead system in zircon, "moderately high" for the uranium-lead in apatite, and considerably lower for the potassium-argon system in plagioclase (respectively approximately nine hundred degrees Celsius, approximately four hundred fifty degrees Celsius, and approximately three hundred degrees Celsius, assuming typical mineral sizes and slow cooling of one to one hundred degrees Celsius per million years). Thus, the uranium-lead system in apatite provides a record of "moderately high-temperature" events that were likely missed or overwritten in other radiometric systems. Another calcium phosphate, merrillite, often provides a similar uranium-lead chronology, although its closure temperature remains to be experimentally determined. The uranium-lead age of apatite in a brecciated basaltic eucrite, Béréba, was reported at four point two billion years; this age was originally interpreted as the beginning of Late Heavy Bombardment on the asteroid. Liao and Hsu reported the similar uranium-lead ages of four point two to four point one billion years from apatite and merrillite in a newly found eucritic impact-melt breccia, Northwest Africa eight thousand nine. According to their mineralogical and geochemical study by Liao and Hsu, NWA eight thousand nine experienced an abnormally severe impact compared to other eucrites, with a peak pressure of approximately fifty to sixty gigapascals and a temperature of approximately one thousand one hundred sixty to twelve hundred degrees Celsius. Conversely, the apatite uranium-lead age of another unbrecciated eucrite, NWA six thousand five hundred ninety-four, recorded an earlier event at four thousand five hundred twenty-three plus or minus two million years ago. Liao et al. attribute this age to a large cataclysmic impact on Vesta, as inferred from other chronologies. By extending this line of reasoning to multiple eucrites, the thermal and collisional history of Vesta can be determined and, by implication, that of the other asteroid belt bodies. Here, we present a new uranium-lead dataset for several eucritic phosphates, which indicates that their parent bodies suffered complicated thermal/impact metamorphism at a very early stage.


## Two. Sample descriptions

Four basaltic eucrites (Juvinas, Camel Donga, Stannern, and Agoult) with an anomalous basaltic achondrite, Ibitira, were studied in this paper. Of the five, three (Juvinas, Camel Donga, and Stannern) are breccias, and the other two (Agoult and Ibitira) are unbrecciated granulites. Brief descriptions of the meteorites are given in the following subsections. The details are summarized in Table One.


## Two point one. Juvinas

Juvinas is known to have fallen in France in eighteen twenty-one. It is composed of various igneous clasts, a porous matrix, and recrystallized areas. According to the metamorphic classification of basaltic eucrites proposed by Takeda and Graham, the chemically equilibrated pyroxenes in Juvinas indicate a thermal metamorphic grade of five. Various chronologies of Juvinas exhibit large variations, reflecting its extremely complicated metamorphic history. The two hundred and seven lead-two hundred and six lead age of its zircons has been reported at approximately four thousand five hundred sixty million years ago and four thousand five hundred forty-five plus or minus fifteen million years ago. These values are consistent with the one hundred eighty-two hafnium-one hundred eighty-two tungsten isochron age of four thousand five hundred forty-six plus or minus three million years ago for the whole rock and its silicate fractions. Conversely, the two hundred seven lead-two hundred six lead isochron of the Juvinas silicates indicates a significantly younger age of four thousand three hundred twenty plus or minus one point seven million years ago. Its forty argon-thirty-nine argon age was disturbed much later at approximately four billion years ago.


## Two point two. Camel Donga

Camel Donga was found in Western Australia in nineteen eighty-four. This meteorite is a severely metamorphosed polymict breccia. Its highly equilibrated pyroxene indicates severe thermal metamorphism. A unique characteristic of Camel Donga is its anomalously high abundances of secondary metallic iron (up to two weight percent), which is thought to be the result of decomposition of initial iron sulfides and silicates during post-crystallization reheating. Mineralogical and chronological studies of Camel Donga also indicate its complicated metamorphism. The aluminum-magnesium short-lived radiometric system in this

Four thousand five hundred fifty-six point seven five plus or minus zero point five seven. Four thousand five hundred fifty-two point zero plus or minus eight point eight. Four thousand four hundred ninety-six point eight million years ago. Four thousand four hundred eighty-seven plus or minus fifteen. The data are from various sources.

eucrite recorded early crystallization at four thousand five hundred sixty-four point thirty-one plus zero point ninety-eight or minus three point forty-eight million years ago. Its zircon two hundred seven lead-two hundred six lead age is four thousand five hundred thirty-one plus or minus ten million years ago, resolvably younger than those of the other basaltic eucrites with mean values of four thousand five hundred fifty-five million years ago. Its oxide two hundred seven lead-two hundred six lead age has been determined to be four thousand five hundred fifteen point forty-three plus or minus zero point forty-two million years ago, slightly younger than its zircon age. Meanwhile, its plagioclase recorded a significantly younger forty argon-thirty-nine argon age of three thousand seven hundred fifty million years ago.


## Two point three. Stannern

Stannern is a monomict brecciated eucrite that fell in the Czech Lands in eighteen oh one. Compared to Juvinas and Camel Donga, its pyroxene chemistry and textural properties exhibit weak thermal effects, suggesting a metamorphic grade of four. Chronological studies of Stannern have revealed an old crystallization age of four thousand five hundred sixty-four plus or minus two million years ago and multiple later metamorphic events. Its slightly younger zircon two hundred seven lead-two hundred six lead age has been reported at four thousand five hundred fifty plus or minus ten million years ago. The uranium-lead and potassium-argon systems in its silicates were severely disturbed.


## Two point four. Agoult

Agoult is a monomict unbrecciated basaltic eucrite that was found in Morocco in two thousand. It is composed of fine-grained granulitic textures with one hundred twenty degree triple junctions, indicating significant recrystallization. Its pyroxenes are chemically well equilibrated between homogeneous low-calcium pyroxene and augite. The trace element patterns of this meteorite are similar to those of the Main Group-Nuevo Laredo trend eucrites, even though Agoult is thought to have undergone partial melting during thermal metamorphism. Both Uranium-Lead and Potassium-Argon systems in Agoult have preserved ancient thermal processes. The two hundred seven Lead-two hundred six Lead isochron ages of zircons and oxides in Agoult are dated at four thousand five hundred fifty-four point five plus minus two point zero million years and four thousand five hundred thirty-two point two nine plus minus zero point eight seven million years, respectively. Its plagioclase presents a young forty Argon-thirty nine Argon plateau age at four thousand four hundred ninety-four plus minus nine million years. Such chronological variations may be associated with slow cooling.

Iizuka et al. estimated the cooling rate of the Agoult host rock at eleven plus minus two degrees Celsius per million years after thermal metamorphism at four thousand five hundred fifty-four point five million years.


## Two point five. Ibitira

Ibitira was found in Brazil in nineteen fifty-seven. The mineralogical and chemical features of Ibitira are indistinguishable from those of recrystallized basaltic eucrites. However, its several unique features, such as vesicle-rich textures and alkali element depletions, suggest that Ibitira came from a parent body other than Vesta. The oxygen three-isotopic composition of Ibitira is reported to be delta seventeen O equals negative zero point zero seven, significantly higher than the known eucrite fractionation line. The pyroxenes in Ibitira were thermally well equilibrated, suggesting a metamorphic grade of five. Similar to Agoult, the chronologies of Ibitira indicate ancient processes. Short-lived Manganese-Chromium systems have indicated an age of four thousand five hundred fifty-six point three million years. Its identical pyroxene age has been precisely determined at four thousand five hundred fifty-six point seven five plus minus zero point five seven million years. Its forty Argon-thirty nine Argon age has been reported at four thousand four hundred eighty-seven plus minus fifteen million years, which overlaps the ages of some unbrecciated eucrites.


## Three. Methods: NanoSIMS Uranium-Lead dating

Polished thick sections of the five meteorites were carbon-coated and observed using SEM-EDS and EPMA to locate apatite and/or merrillite minerals with analyzable grain sizes greater than or equal to ten micrometers and study their petrological features. After NanoSIMS dating, the major element compositions of these phosphates were analyzed using a JXA-eight five three zero F at the Department of Earth and Planetary Science, University of Tokyo, Japan. The mineral phases of adjacent silica minerals were also observed following the NanoSIMS analyses using a Raman spectrometer JASCO NRS-one thousand at the National Institute of Polar Research, Japan. The detailed conditions and results of the observational studies are described in the supplementary information.

All samples were slightly re-polished (less than approximately zero point three micrometers) after the initial SEM-EDS observations and then gold coated and baked at approximately one hundred degrees Celsius in the NanoSIMS air-lock system prior to the isotopic analyses. Both two three eight two zero six lead dating and two zero seven lead two zero six lead dating were conducted using a NanoSIMS fifty at Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, University of Tokyo, Japan. The detailed analytical protocols and calibration methods are given in Takahata et al. and Koike et al.. A two nanoampere O minus beam was focused with a spot size of approximately ten micrometers. To obtain the two three eight uranium two zero six lead age, secondary ions of thirty-one P plus, forty-three Ca plus, two zero four Pb plus, two zero six Pb plus, two three eight U one six O plus, and two three eight U one six O two plus were simultaneously collected for six hundred seconds per spot using the NanoSIMS multi-collectors. Then, in the magnetic peak jumping mode, the secondary ions of two zero four Pb plus, two zero six Pb plus, two zero seven Pb plus measured at the same spot for approximately one hour to determine two zero seven Pb two zero six Pb age. A natural apatite standard from Canada (called "PRAP" in Sano et al.) was used to calibrate the measured two three eight U two zero six Pb ratios in the two zero six P D plus P two three eight U one six O plus minus two three eight U one six O two plus divided by two three eight U one six O plus diagram. The two three eight U J two zero six Pb and two zero seven Pb two zero six Pb isochron ages were calculated using Isoplot software. The isochron ages were calculated for the individual meteorites, assuming that all phosphates in one meteorite (except for Juvinas, discussed later) recorded the same history. The model two zero seven Pb star divided by two zero six Pb star ages were calculated for the individual data, which provide in-situ thermal histories for individual analyzed areas. We assumed an initial two zero seven two zero six two zero four Pb composition (same to the Canyon Diablo troilite) and a specific two three eight U two three five U ratio for the model two zero seven Pb star divided by two zero six Pb star calculations, which does not affect our results and discussion. For details concerning the age calculations, see the supplementary information.


## Four. Results

Four point one. U-Pb chronology of phosphates in the brecciated eucrites

In Juvinas, several anhedral grains of F-rich apatite and mer- rillite were found in both lithic clasts and around the finegrained high-porosity matrix. The matrix contains numerous opaque minerals with size variations from submicron to approximately ten micrometers. A large elongated silica grain composed of quartz and tridymite, with a size of one hundred micrometers wide by approximately three millimeters long, appears abruptly between the coarse-grained lithic clasts and the fine-grained porous matrix. These silica polymorphs provide additional information about thermal and metamorphic histories. All phosphates in the matrix areas are located adjacent to the quartz-tridymite grain. The apatite in the coarse-grained lithic areas does not exhibit such a relationship. Three apatite grains, two from the from the lithic clast, with four spot data, define matrix and one isochron age of four thousand five hundred fifty-two plus-minus eighty-five million years. Hereafter, the age uncertainties are at the ninety-five percent confidence level. The model ages were calculated to be approximately four thousand six hundred thirty to four thousand four hundred eighty-five million years, with a weighted mean of four thousand five hundred sixteen point nine plus-minus ten point four million years. Their two hundred thirty-eight U two hundred six Pb isochron age was poorly determined at five thousand thirty-seven plus-minus four hundred eighty million years. The large uncertainty in this age is primarily because most data points have indistinguishable two hundred four Pb two hundred six Pb ratios, which resulted in a small MSWD value of zero point one. Conversely, the four merrillite grains with eight data define an isochron age as young as four thousand two hundred plus-minus forty-nine million years. Their model ages range between approximately four thousand one hundred seventy million years and four thousand eighty million years with a weighted mean of four thousand one hundred fifty point three plus-minus eleven point six million years. Detailed results two hundred thirty-eight U two hundred six Pb isochrons are presented in Figures S7-S12. All the isotopic data are presented in Table S2.

In Camel Donga, several anhedral grains of F-rich apatite approximately ten to two hundred micrometers were found in coarse-grained lithic clasts and the granulitic recrystallized matrix. The nearby silica mineral phases are quartz, monoclinic tridymite, tridymite. The isochron ages were calculated using six apatite grains with eight spot data, giving ages of four thousand two hundred twenty-two plus-minus four hundred thirty million years and four thousand four hundred sixty-five plus-minus eighty-two million years, respectively. The large MSWD value of five point zero means that the isotopic data are highly scattered. The model ages vary between approximately four thousand five hundred seventy million years and four thousand three hundred seventy million years. Their weighted mean value was calculated at four thousand four hundred ninety-one point four plus-minus thirteen point five million years, except for the youngest outlier, which had an age of four thousand three hundred seventy-two plus twenty-six over minus twenty-seven million years. There is no apparent correlation between the textural or chemical properties of the individual apatite grains and their two hundred seven Pb* by two hundred six Pb* ages.

Stannern also contains several fluorine-rich apatite and merrillite grains in igneous lithic clasts and in the granulitic recrystallized matrix. Apatite grains in the granulitic areas appear as an intergrowth with ilmenite, plagioclase, and silica-rich mesostasis. Numerous fractures intersect both the granulitic areas and the surrounding igneous clasts. The apatite and merrillite grains in the igneous clasts are anhedral and highly fractured and are adjacent to equilibrated pyroxene, plagioclase, and isolated ilmenite. The six apatite grains and one merrillite grain yielded isochron age of three thousand nine hundred seventy-five plus or minus one hundred ten million years (mean square weighted deviation equals zero point two seven) and a lead two hundred seven to lead two hundred six isochron age of four thousand one hundred thirty-four plus or minus forty-seven million years (mean square weighted deviation equals five point three). The high mean square weighted deviation value indicates that the uranium-lead system in the Stannern phosphates has been disturbed. The model two zero seven lead star over two zero six lead star ages vary from approximately four thousand two hundred seventy million years to four thousand eighty million years. Their weighted mean value is four thousand one hundred forty-three point zero plus or minus twelve point five million years, except for the oldest outlier Stn-five; four thousand two hundred two.


## Four point two. U-Pb chronology of phosphates in the unbrecciated achondrites

In Agoult, euhedral to rounded grains of F-rich apatite with sizes of ten to one hundred micrometers were observed homogeneously throughout the studied section. Their U-Pb age can be determined more precisely compared to those of the other brecciated eucrites. The seven grains with ten spot analyses yielded a <LATEX>2 3 8 U - 2 0 6 P b</LATEX> isochron age of four three five zero plus or minus two nine zero mega annum (M S W D equals one point two) and a <LATEX>2 0 7 P b - 2 0 6 P b</LATEX> isochron age of four five three zero plus or minus seventeen mega annum (M S W D equals two point zero). The model <LATEX>2 0 7 p b ^ { * } / 2 0 6 p b ^ { * }</LATEX> ages are between approximately four thousand five hundred sixty mega annum and four thousand five hundred four mega annum, with a weighted mean of four five two four point eight plus or minus nine point seven mega annum.

Ibitira is characterized by numerous spherical vesicles with sizes of one hundred to five hundred micrometers in its unbrecciated recrystallized area. On the wall of the vesicle, an approximately one hundred fifty micrometer round-shaped grain of merrillite was identified. Smaller grains (approximately twenty micrometers) of merrillite were also found in its igneous textures. The five merrillite grains with seven spot analyses did not define a <LATEX>2 3 8 U - 2 0 6 P b</LATEX> isochron or <LATEX>2 0 7 P b - 2 0 6 P b</LATEX> isochron age with meaningful precision, primarily because of the overlapping of the data. The model <LATEX>2 0 7 p b ^ { * } / 2 0 6 p b ^ { * }</LATEX> age was calculated at four thousand five hundred sixty-three to four thousand five hundred fifteen mega annum, with a weighted mean of 4552 plus or minus 8.8 mega annum.


## Five. Discussion

Five point one. Two ages in Juvinas: older apatite and younger merrillite

Only Juvinas presents two distinctly different ages for apatite and merrillite. The model <LATEX>2 0 7 P b ^ { * } / 2 0 6 P b ^ { * }</LATEX> ages are four thousand five hundred sixteen point nine plus or minus ten point four mega annum for the apatite and four thousand one hundred fifty point three plus or minus eleven point six mega annum for the merrillite. Most apatite (except for Juv-1) and all merrillite grains are located in a close area, even though they recorded completely different timings. One possible explanation is that the U-Pb system in merrillite can more readily be reset than that in apatite so that only merrillite records the four thousand one hundred fifty mega annum event. Although we know the U-Pb closure temperature of apatite (discussed later), unfortunately, there is no available information for merrillite at this moment. Previous SIMS U-Pb studies have not found such age differences between meteoritic apatite and merrillite. It is likely that the U-Pb systems in apatite and merrillite record the same events in regular cases. Another, more plausible case is that the reheating temperature in the four thousand one hundred fifty mega annum event was heterogeneous and that it locally reached higher temperatures. The relationship between the apatite and merrillite and the adjacent silica polymorphs supports this interpretation. Tridymite is a high-temperature silica phase (stable at eight hundred seventy to one thousand four hundred seventy degrees Celsius under one atmosphere; Fenner, nineteen thirteen). The tridymite in Juvinas has a smooth surface and euhedral to subhedral shapes, suggesting that it recrystallized from primary mesostasis (or its partial melt) during a high temperature reheating (greater than eight hundred seventy degrees Celsius) and subsequent rapid cooling process. We assume this event to be identical to the merrillite <LATEX>2 0 7 P b ^ { * } / 2 0 6 P b ^ { * }</LATEX> age, because all of the merrillite grains are located close to the tridymite. It is likely that they suffered local heterogeneous thermal metamorphism at four thousand one hundred fifty mega annum. Similar metamorphic origins of tridymite have been suggested for several basaltic eucrites. Conversely, the porous and anhedral quartz may be a relic of igneous mesostasis, consistent with observations of other basaltic eucrites. Considering that the apatite is located close to the mesostasis quartz, as well as in the lithic clast, the apatite should be an igneous relic mineral.


## Five point two. Brecciated eucrites are consistent with a continual collisional history

What do the two ages found in Juvinas mean? Both the apatite (approximately four thousand five hundred twenty mega annum) and the merrillite (approximately four thousand one hundred fifty mega annum) in Juvinas are significantly younger than the crystallization age of Juvinas whole rock dated by the <LATEX>Mn-Cr</LATEX> system at four thousand five hundred sixty-two point five plus or minus one mega annum (Lugmair and Shukolyukov, nineteen ninety-eight). The U-Pb age of the Juvinas zircon recorded a thermal event at four thousand five hundred forty-five plus or minus fifteen mega annum, consistent with the ubiquitous crustal metamorphism of Vesta at four thousand five hundred fifty-four point five plus or minus two mega annum. The four thousand five hundred twenty mega annum Juvinas apatite is expected to have recorded either a slow cooling process subsequent to the four thousand five hundred fifty-four million years ago crustal metamorphism similar to the case of the Agoult apatite (discussed in the following subsection), or independent impact reheating similar to the previous NWA six thousand five hundred ninety-four apatite (Pb-Pb age of four thousand five hundred twenty-three plus or minus two million years ago). Conversely, the four thousand one hundred fifty million years ago merrillite accompanied by tridymite may represent the timing of an intense impact reheating event. The U-Pb systems in the Juvinas pyroxene and plagioclase were also severely disturbed. Their two thousand seven Pb-two thousand six Pb mineral isochron age was reported at four thousand three hundred twenty point nine plus or minus one point seven million years ago, which may be the result of an incomplete U-Pb reset at a later reheating event (i.e., the four thousand one hundred fifty million years ago event). The K-Ar system was further disturbed (the forty Ar-thirty-nine Ar age around approximately four thousand one hundred to four thousand million years ago), implying a weaker event. To summarize, Juvinas likely suffered severe impacts at four thousand three hundred twenty to four thousand one hundred fifty million years ago and weaker reheating at approximately four thousand million years ago. The metamorphic history of Juvinas can be explained as follows: (i) original crystallization at four thousand five hundred sixty-three million years ago, (ii) thermal crustal metamorphism and formation of secondary zircons at approximately four thousand five hundred fifty million years ago, (iii) closure/reset of the apatite U-Pb system at approximately four thousand five hundred twenty million years ago through slow cooling or reheating, (iv) a later reset of the U-Pb system in merrillite at approximately four thousand one hundred fifty million years ago through impact reheating, and (v) a final disturbance of the K-Ar system at approximately four thousand million years ago possibly due to a weaker impact.

The U-Pb systems in the Camel Donga apatite are severely disturbed. Even though the mean model two zero seven p b star divided by two zero six p b star age was determined to be four thousand four hundred ninety-one point four plus or minus thirteen point five million years ago, the youngest outlier recorded an age of four thousand three hundred seventy-two plus or minus twenty-six million years ago (Fig. four). No apparent correlation was observed between the two zero seven p b star divided by two zero six p b star ages and the textural properties of the individual apatite grains (Figs. two and S two). The mean age of approximately four thousand four hundred ninety million years ago is approximately thirty million years younger than the two zero seven p b star divided by two zero six p b star age of the Agoult apatite (four thousand five hundred twenty-five million years ago; Fig. four). This time log of approximately thirty M between Camel Donga and Agoult is similar to the U-Pb systems in their zircons (Table one: Camel Donga, four thousand five hundred thirty-one plus or minus ten million years ago; Agoult, four thousand four hundred fifty-four point five plus or minus two point zero million years ago; Iizuka and oxides (Camel Donga, five point forty-three plus or minus zero point forty-two million years ago; Agoult, four thousand five hundred thirty-two point thirty-nine plus or minus zero point eighty-seven million years ago). The four thousand four hundred ninety million year ago apatite is consistent with a previous interpretation that Camel Donga resided in a distinct region on the parent body and underwent the thermal metamorphism at crust approximately twenty million years later than the other eucrites (Iizuka et al., two thousand nineteen). In addition, the presence of young apatite at four thousand three hundred seventy-two plus or minus twenty-six million years ago indicates that there was a distinct reheating event at approximately four thousand three hundred seventy million years ago, which caused an incomplete disturbance of the U-Pb system. Conversely, the forty Ar-thirty-nine Ar age in the Camel Donga plagioclase was completely reset at three thousand seven hundred forty-nine plus or minus twenty-five million years ago because of an independent impact (Iizuka et al., two thousand nineteen). This last event at approximately three thousand seven hundred fifty Na caused diffusion and brecciation of the host rock, even though reheating temperature was not high enough to reset the U-Pb system in the apatite. To summarize, the metamorphic history of Camel Donga can be described as follows: (i) initial crystallization at four thousand five hundred sixty-four million years ago (Hublet et al., two thousand seventeen), (ii) high-temperature thermal metamorphism in the crust at four thousand five hundred thirty million years ago, (iii) subsequent slow cooling until four thousand four hundred ninety million years ago, (iv) an additional impact causing an incomplete disturbance of the apatite U-Pb system at four thousand three hundred seventy million years ago, and (v) final impact brecciation at three thousand seven hundred fifty million years ago, where only the K-Ar system was

The mean two thousand seven p b star divided by two thousand six p b age of the Stannern phosphates also recorded young metamorphism at four thousand one hundred forty-three point zero plus or minus twelve point five million years ago (Fig. four), suggesting that they experienced severe impact reheating at this time. In contrast to Juvinas, both the apatite and merrillite in Stannern yielded identical ages. This may be because the host rock of Stannern was reheated more homogeneously to the U-Pb reset temperature. According to geochemical studies of the trace incompatible element trends, the geological backgrounds of Stannern and Juvinas should be different, which means that they resided at different locations on Vesta. Their identical reheating ages of approximately four thousand one hundred fifty million years ago indicate that there were two (or more) impact events on Vesta during this period, where the re heating temperature was high enough to reset the uranium lead system in the phosphates greater than or equal to approximately five hundred ninety to one thousand degrees Celsius discussed later) but inadequate to reset that of the zircon. Moreover, the two hundred seven lead two hundred six lead age of the Stannern pyroxene and plagioclase also recorded this event at four thousand one hundred twenty-eight plus minus sixteen mega-annum. The Stannern forty argon thirty-nine argon age was disturbed at approximately four thousand two hundred to three thousand eight hundred mega-annum and did not present a plateau age. Conversely, several radiometric chronologies place the early crystallization of Stannern at four thousand five hundred sixty-three mega-annum. Its zircon two hundred seven lead two hundred six lead age recorded early thermal metamorphism at four thousand five hundred fifty plus minus ten mega-annum. Therefore, the metamorphic history of Stannern can be summarized as follows: one, ancient crystallization at four thousand five hundred sixty-three mega-annum, two, thermal crustal metamorphism at four thousand five hundred fifty mega-annum, three, a reset of the uranium lead system in the phosphates and silicates at approximately four thousand one hundred forty mega-annum through intense impact reheating, and four, a subsequent weaker impact at sometime between approximately four thousand five hundred and approximately three thousand six hundred mega-annum, where the potassium argon chronometer was disturbed. Events three and four may indicate the same event.


## Five point three. Unbrecciated achondrites represent the initial cooling of asteroids

The U-Pb systems in the unbrecciated samples, Agoult and Ibitira, recorded significantly ancient events prior to four point five giga-annum. The model P B two zero seven star over P B two zero six star age of the Agoult apatite, four thousand five hundred twenty-four point eight plus minus nine point six mega-annum, is identical to or slightly younger than the two hundred seven lead two hundred six lead age of its oxide fraction four thousand five hundred thirty-two point three nine plus minus zero point eight seven mega-annum and is significantly younger than that of the zircon four thousand five hundred fifty-four point five plus minus two point zero mega-annum. The age differences between the different minerals may reflect the slow cooling of the Agoult host rock. It is likely that the rock was buried within the crust after its original crystallization and was subsequently heated by the hot interior of Vesta. The original internal heat source, a short-lived radionuclide Aluminum twenty-six with half-life approximately zero point seven mega-annum, had mostly decayed by this time approximately four thousand five hundred fifty-five to four thousand five hundred twenty-five mega-annum. However, according to a thermochemical evolution calculation, the interior of the mantle of Vesta likely maintained a high temperature for greater than one hundred mega-annum after differentiation. The recrystallized textures of Agoult, with no apparent evidence of impact brecciation, further support this hypothesis of crustal thermal metamorphism. The forty argon thirty-nine argon plateau age of the Agoult plagioclase at four thousand four hundred ninety-six plus minus eight mega-annum recorded the end of its subsequent slow cooling. To summarize, Agoult has the following thermal history: one, ancient crystallization at greater than four thousand five hundred sixty mega-annum, two, high-temperature crustal metamorphism at four thousand five hundred fifty-five mega-annum, and three, subsequent monotonic cooling with a low eleven plus minus two degrees Celsius per mega-annum in the deep crust.

The merrillite in Ibitira recorded an earlier event, with the model two hundred seven P b star divided by two hundred six P b star age of four thousand five hundred fifty-two point zero plus or minus eight point eight million years. This value is indistinguishable from its pyroxene two hundred seven P b two hundred six P b isochron age of four thousand five hundred fifty-six point seventy-five plus or minus zero point fifty-seven million years. The whole-rock M n-C r systems also recorded this age four thousand five hundred fifty-seven plus two divided by minus four million years. Thermal metamorphism at approximately four thousand five hundred fifty-five million years is consistent with the records in the eucrites, even though Ibitira came from a different parent body. The forty A r thirty-nine A r age of four thousand four hundred eighty-seven plus or minus fifteen million years for Ibitira is distinctly younger than those from the other chronometers. It is inferred that Ibitira experienced (i) ancient crystallization likely prior to four thousand five hundred sixty million years, (ii) high-temperature thermal metamorphism in the crust at four thousand five hundred fifty-five million years, and (iii) subsequent monotonic cooling until approximately four thousand four hundred ninety million years. Intense asteroidal collisions prior to four point fifteen billion years?

Our study reveals that the U-Pb system in the phosphates in the three brecciated eucrites recorded multiple impact events prior to four point fifteen billion years. The phosphates U-Pb ages of two other brecciated eucrites, NWA eight thousand nine and Bereba, also recorded the thermal events at approximately four point twenty-five to four point one billion years. Moreover, the silicate U-Pb systems in some eucrites recorded coincident timings. It is obvious that the parent body, Vesta, suffered intense impacts at greater than or equal to four point fifteen billion years, during which the U-Pb systems in its phosphates and silicates were partially reset. Conversely, only the K-A r system recorded the later bombardment on Vesta at three point eighty-five to three point forty-seven billion years. The absence of approximately three point eighty-five billion-year records in the phosphates U-Pb systems suggests that these later impacts were weaker than the earlier impacts, greater than four point fifteen billion years, resulting in lower reheating temperatures.

The closure temperatures T sub C of the U-Pb system in zircon and apatite, and of the K-A r system in plagioclase are calculated using Dodson's law: T sub C equals E divided by R log open parenthesis A R D sub zero T sub C squared divided by a squared E T prime close parenthesis, where E equals activation energy, R equals gas constant, D sub zero equals coefficient, and A is a dimensionless constant, with known diffusion properties of P b and/or A r. For diffusion scale a, we use typical grain sizes of the minerals in the basaltic eucrites. Cooling rate T prime is an unknown parameter. In high-temperature range twelve hundred degrees Celsius to eight hundred fifty degrees Celsius, T prime for the basaltic eucrites is known to be as rapid as four thousand degrees Celsius per million years. By extrapolating this to the lower temperature range, T sub C becomes approximately five hundred ninety degrees Celsius for the U-Pb in apatite and approximately three hundred degrees Celsius for the K-A r in plagioclase. The detailed conditions for the T sub C calculations and their results are provided in supplementary Table S three. In case of impact-induced reheating and subsequent rapid quenching at the near-surface of the asteroid the closure temperatures are much higher. Assuming a rapid quenching one degree Celsius per day, or, four times ten to the eighth degrees Celsius per million years after impact reheating, T sub C becomes approximately one thousand degrees Celsius for the U-Pb in apatite, approximately five hundred degrees Celsius for the K-A r in plagioclase, and exceed the melting point of basaltic rock for the U-Pb in zircon. This means the U-Pb ages in the eucrite zircon may not be disturbed by impacts without extensive remelting and/or recrystallization, unless our assumption of the rapid quenching is incorrect.

In Fig. 5, we compiled the literature data for the U-Pb and Hf-W chronologies of zircon, the U-Pb system of silicates and phosphates, and the K-Ar system of whole-rock or silicates dated by the forty A r thirty-nine A r method for various basaltic eucrites and mesosiderites. There seem to be three key age groups: (1) prior to four point five billion years, (2) prior to four point fifteen billion years, and (3) near approximately three point nine to three point five billion years.

One. The initial magmatic crystallization (four point five six billion years ago) and subsequent thermal metamorphism occurred prior to four point five billion years ago. The U-Pb ages of the various eucrite zircons reveal the timing of the ubiquitous thermal metamorphism of the initial basaltic crust of Vesta to be four point five five billion years ago at a metamorphic temperature of approximately nine hundred degrees Celsius. After an intensive initial differentiation at four point five six billion years ago, the magmatism on Vesta lasted until four point five three billion years ago, according to the Hf-W records of unbrecciated eucrite zircon. In addition, the asteroid may have suffered a large basin-forming collision at this stage. The U-Pb, and Hf-W studies of mesosiderite zircons also provide a high-temperature reheating age of four point five three billion years ago that is attributed to a catastrophic collision.

Two. After this early event one, the asteroid experienced moderate collisions prior to four point one five billion years ago. At this stage, none of the earlier zircon crystals were remelted or recrystallized and the crystals' U-Pb and Hf-W chronologies remained closed. Instead, the impacts were recorded by the U-Pb systems in phosphates and silicates in several brecciated eucrites. The reheating temperature likely exceeded their closure temperatures (approximately five hundred ninety to one thousand degrees Celsius) and rapidly quenched. Some regions may have exceeded the basalt melting point and formed the impact melt. Because the studied eucrites resided at different locations on their parent body, their records indicate multiple collisions during approximately four point four to four point one five billion years ago.

Three. Later collisions occurred at approximately three point nine to three point five billion years ago. These events were recorded only by the forty Ar-thirty nine Ar ages, where the reheating temperature may have slightly exceeded the K-Ar closure temperature. Theoretical calculations indicate that such moderate reheating can be achieved by low-velocity (i.e., slower than the typical relative speed of asteroidal bodies) mild collisions. The absence of a U-Pb record (for either phosphates or silicates) at approximately three point nine billion years ago suggests that these later collisions were much weaker than the earlier ones.

The multiple moderate collisions prior to four point one five billion years ago (event two) could be attributed to the start of the Late Heavy Bombardment, even though some data in Figure five are significantly earlier than the forty Ar-thirty nine Ar ages. Conversely, event two can be explained as an "end-tail" of the cataclysmic collisions at the earlier stage of greater than four point five billion years ago (event one). Such "end-tail" collisions significantly decreased by approximately three point nine billion years ago (event three), when only weak (or low-velocity) impacts occurred. This interpretation matches the recent theoretical models of an early bombardment (greater than or equal to four point five billion years ago) and a subsequent monotonic decrease in impacts in the inner solar system. Even though the number of key chronological data is still small, this is an important piece of evidence for the early collisional history of the inner solar system. Future studies of other asteroidal materials are expected to help reconstruct the whole history.


## Six. Conclusions

NanoSIMS U-Pb dating was conducted on apatite and merrillite minerals in three brecciated basaltic eucrites (Juvinas, Camel Donga, and Stannern) and two unbrecciated basaltic achondrites (Agoult and Ibitira). The weighted mean model two zero seven Pb star divided by two zero six Pb star age of the Agoult apatite was determined to be four five two four point eight plus-minus nine point six million years, significantly younger than its zircon age (four five five five million years) and older than the

Forty argon minus thirty-nine argon age of its plagioclase, four thousand four hundred ninety-six million years. This is consistent with a previous interpretation that Agoult recorded ubiquitous high-temperature metamorphism of the initial crust of Vesta. The two hundred seven P B star over two hundred six P B star age of the Ibitira merrillite is four thousand five hundred fifty-two point zero plus or minus eight point seven million years, consistent with the other chronometers in this meteorite. Conversely, the model two hundred seven P B star over two hundred six P B star ages of the Juvinas phosphates recorded two distinct events at four thousand five hundred sixteen point nine plus or minus ten point four million years, the weighted mean value for apatite, and four thousand one hundred fifty point three plus or minus eleven point six million years, merrillite. The earlier age reflects either crustal metamorphism or an independent impact at approximately four thousand five hundred twenty million years. The later age reveals the presence of a moderate collisional reheating event at four thousand one hundred fifty million years. This timing is identical to the two hundred seven P B star over two hundred six P B star of the Stannern apatite and merrillite at four thousand one hundred forty-three point zero plus or minus twelve point five million years. For the Camel Donga apatite, the model two hundred seven P B star over two hundred six P B star ages present a mean value of four thousand four hundred ninety-one point four plus or minus thirteen point five million years with one exceptionally disturbed value of approximately four thousand three hundred seventy million years. Apparently, these brecciated eucrites indicate the presence of multiple collisional events during the period of approximately four thousand four hundred to four thousand one hundred fifty million years ago. By combining our chronological dataset with data from the literature, the thermal and metamorphic history of Vesta's crust can be described as follows: One. Initial magmatic processes occurred during the period of approximately four thousand five hundred sixty to four thousand five hundred million years ago. Cataclysmic collision(s) also occurred during this stage. Two. The asteroid subsequently experienced multiple collisions during the period of approximately four thousand four hundred to four thousand one hundred fifty million years ago, which were recorded by the uranium-lead systems in apatite, merrillite and some silicates, but not by the uranium-lead system in zircons. The reheating temperature exceeded the apatite uranium-lead closure temperature, approximately five hundred ninety to one thousand degrees Celsius, and likely reached locally the basalt melting point. Three. Later collisions at approximately three thousand nine hundred to three thousand five hundred million years ago were recorded only by the potassium-argon system. The reheating temperature was likely less than or equal to five hundred degrees Celsius, which can be achieved through weak impacts. The records on Vesta are well explained by a scenario with early asteroidal bombardments and a monotonic decrease of the bombardment rate from greater than or equal to four thousand five hundred million years ago to approximately four thousand one hundred million years ago, rather than by the conventional late heavy bombardment.


## CRediT authorship contribution statement

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.