## dvoe-2024-08-26_19_05_45-insulin.pdf

Impact of insulin and insulin resistance on brain dopamine signalling and reward processing - An underexplored mechanism in the pathophysiology of depression?


## One. Introduction

Insulin is a peptidergic hormone mainly produced by the beta-cells of the pancreas and was initially thought to regulate blood glucose concentrations only by binding to its receptor and promoting glucose uptake into cells in the periphery. However, when insulin receptors were identified in multiple brain areas, the essential role of central insulin signalling in the regulation of whole-body glucose metabolism was recognized. Amongst other regions, insulin receptors are highly expressed in the dopaminergic midbrain, which encodes reward-seeking behaviour, so that a further role of central insulin signalling - the regulation of reward-related behaviour - has


## ABSTRACT

Type two diabetes and major depressive disorder are the leading causes of disability worldwide and have a high comorbidity rate with fatal outcomes. Despite the long-established association between these conditions, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unknown.

Since the discovery of insulin receptors in the brain and the brain's reward system, evidence has accumulated indicating that insulin modulates dopaminergic signalling and reward behaviour. Here, we review the evidence from rodent and human studies, that insulin resistance directly alters central dopamine pathways, which may result in motivational deficits and depressive symptoms. Specifically, we first elaborate on the differential effects of insulin on dopamine signalling in the ventral tegmental area - the primary dopamine source region in the midbrain - and the striatum as well as its effects on behaviour. We then focus on the alterations induced by insulin deficiency and resistance. Finally, we review the impact of insulin resistance in dopamine pathways in promoting depressive symptoms and anhedonia on a molecular and epidemiological level and discuss its relevance for stratified treatment strategies.

been progressively unravelled in recent years. Due to the alterations observed in dopamine-encoded reward-related behaviour, it has been proposed that impaired dopamine signalling in conditions of central insulin resistance might be causally related to depressive and anxious symptoms. In recent years, a wave of fundamental rodent studies has revived the old debate regarding the comorbidity, and causality, of diabetes and depression, offering new opportunities to investigate underlying mechanisms and use them to improve treatment efficacy.

In this review, we explore the role of insulin in regulating dopamine signalling in the midbrain - with a focus on the projections from the ventral tegmental area (see two point one) to the ventral striatum (see two point two) - and consequently in reward-related behaviour encoded by the mesolimbic pathways (two point three and two point four). Further, we review how central insulin resistance affects dopamine signalling (three point one and three point two) and reward-seeking behaviour in rodents (three point three) as well as humans (three point four) and as an outlook discuss the clinical importance of impaired insulin signalling in depression and its therapeutical implications (three point five).


## One point one. Encoding of reward-related behaviour in the dopamine midbrain

The dopamine midbrain including the ventral tegmental area and the substantia nigra is the major source of dopamine neurons in the brain. Dopamine neurons are organized in subpopulations, which are heterogeneous in their anatomical location, projection site, electrophysiological properties, and function. While dopamine neurons in the substantia nigra mainly project to the dorsal striatum (nigrostriatal pathway) and are involved in movement control, different subpopulations of dopamine neurons projecting from the ventral tegmental area to the prefrontal cortex (mesocortical pathway) and the ventral striatum (mesolimbic pathway), in particular the nucleus accumbens, encode multiple aspects of reward-seeking behaviour, such as reward-driven learning and motivation to work for reward. Palatable food, sex, and social contact are considered as primary rewards that are strongly encoded in this system. According to the currently dominant theory of reward learning, reward-driven learning is guided by reward prediction errors, which reflect the discrepancy between an expected reward and the actual level of the obtained reward. These reward prediction errors function as learning signals and are encoded by dopamine cell spiking in the ventral tegmental area causing phasic dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens in case of a bigger reward obtained than expected (positive reward prediction error) and by a decrease of dopamine spiking if a smaller than expected reward is gained (negative reward prediction error). As learning progresses, phasic dopamine release shifts from responding to the obtained rewards to responding to the perception of a learned cue predicting an upcoming reward. Both the cue and reward-associated dopamine signals are essential for consolidating learned associations so that inhibition of either cue- or reward-related the beta-cells of the pancreas the AP2-bound inceptor mediates the clathrin-mediated endocytosis of insulin receptor and promotes its degradation. The inceptor has also been identified in the brain, but its role is still unclear. Created with BioRender.com.

dopamine signals impairs the expression of learned associative behaviour. The reward prediction error theory has currently been challenged by recent research, which developed an algorithm for retrospective causal learning and found that mesolimbic dopamine release conveys retrospective causal associations but not prospective reward prediction error. While these theories diverge conceptually and propose different biological frameworks of dopamine action, they both consolidate the relevance of dopamine signals in association learning, which guides adaptive behaviour.

Additionally, dopamine not only encodes learning signals but also motivates action initiation to obtain a reward. As such, dopamine release ramps up when we approach a reward, reflecting reward expectancy. The amount of dopamine released during this phase is locally controlled in the nucleus accumbens without corresponding changes in ventral tegmental area dopamine cell spiking and provides information about the value of the anticipated reward, motivating the initiation of action to obtain it. In this constant feedback circle, the actions initiated upon the perception of a potential reward shape future reward behaviour, as nucleus accumbens dopamine release is attenuated unless a correct action to obtain the reward is initiated.


## One point two. Dopamine signalling in the ventral striatum

Since DA ramping in the NAc is independent of VTA DA cell spiking, the magnitude and duration of DA signalling not only depends on the somatic firing of DA VTA neurons but also on the regulation of DA release from nerve terminals within the NAc. DA release in the NAc is regulated by cholinergic interneurons within the NAc, which are tonically active and release acetylcholine. Acetylcholine binds to nicotinic and muscarinic acetylcholine receptors on DA nerve terminals to directly depolarize DA terminals increasing striatal DA release independently of somatic firing, which provides a distinct modulatory mechanism. Moreover, terminal DA signalling depends on DA

receptor availability and the efficiency of DA clearance, which is determined by the DA transporter, the level of enzymatic degradation of DA by COMT, mainly in cortex and less in DA midbrain, and its diffusion from the synapse. The inhibitory DA auto-receptor D2 modulates several of these regulatory steps: Upon binding of DA to axonal D2 receptors in the NAc, it reduces the exocytotic release of DA from axon terminals, increases the activity of the DAT and consequently DA clearance from the synaptic cleft. It also inhibits tyrosine hydroxylase activity and therefore DA synthesis. Somatodendritic D2 receptors in the VTA also regulate DA signalling. Upon DA release from the soma and dendrites, DA binds to somatodendritic D2 receptors, which activates hyperpolarizing G protein-gated inwardly rectifying potassium channel currents resulting in reduced firing rate and excitability of VTA DA neurons. While both axonal and somatodendritic D2 receptors reduce DA signalling onto medium spiny neurons in the NAc, it is unclear how regulation of DA signalling via axonal and somatodendritic D2 receptors is intertwined and whether treatments, that change efferent axonal DA release, also cause similar changes in local somatodendritic DA release. Additionally, neuronal DA signalling is modulated by surrounding astrocytes, along with microglia and oligodendrocytes, which are important for the homeostasis of the brain microenvironment.

It also inhibits tyrosine hydroxylase activity and therefore D A synthesis. Somatodendritic D two receptors in the V T A also regulate D A signalling. Upon D A release from the soma and dendrites, D A binds to somatodendritic D two receptors, which activates hyperpolarizing G protein-gated inwardly rectifying potassium channel, or G I R K, currents resulting in reduced firing rate and excitability of V T A D A neurons. While both axonal and somatodendritic D two receptors reduce D A signalling onto medium spiny neuron in the N Ac, it is unclear how regulation of D A signalling via axonal and somatodendritic D two receptors is intertwined and whether treatments, that change efferent axonal D A release, also cause similar changes in local somatodendritic D A release. Additionally, neuronal D A signalling is modulated by surrounding astrocytes, along with microglia and oligodendrocytes, which are important for the homeostasis of the brain microenvironment.


## One point three. Operationalization of dopamine-dependent reward behaviour

As a result, D A signalling between V T A and ventral striatum portrays two specific signals, both of which are affected by a plethora of regulatory influences equally important to guide reward-seeking behaviour and: One, D A functions as a learning signal by encoding the difference between an expected and received reward guiding future reward-seeking behaviour and Two, it encodes motivation to approach a possible reward. With both signals combined, D A conveys the decision variable "available reward for investment of effort", which is employed for both learning and motivational functions. Studies assessing reward-seeking behaviour encoded by the D A midbrain in animals or humans employ many different tasks, each addressing a combination of the different aspects of reward-seeking behaviour guided by learned associations. In animals, food, in particular palatable food high in sugar and fat, or addictive drugs are often used as rewards, the approach thereof, its retrieval and consumption as well as the effort exerted to obtain the reward (lever pressing) are measured to quantify motivation. Place preference conditioned by reward-predicting stimuli and learning of reward magnitude, such as indicated by size of lick bursts in a reward licking task, and reward retrieval, such as in a T-maze or three chamber arena, are widely used to analyze learning behaviour. In humans, self-report questionnaires, a variety of motivation and learning tasks in combination with functional magnetic resonance imaging or f M R I or positron emission tomography or P E T have been leveraged to disentangle the underlying mechanisms. While we here focus on D A-encoded reward-responsiveness, it needs to be kept in mind, that apart from the difficulty of deciphering the many aspects of reward-seeking behaviour and the varied molecular regulators, reward-seeking behaviour is also affected by further cell types in the V T A and N Ac, such as the V T A glutamate neurons, G A B A neurons and local opioid signalling.


## Two. Insulin signalling in the brain

Motivated behaviour - particularly food-seeking - critically depends on an organism's metabolic need and energy storage (e.g. an apple appears more valuable when we are hungry than when we just had lunch). Therefore, homeostatic information is integrated with external cues in the midbrain D A system through multiple pathways to ensure goal-directed adaptive behaviour. One of these pathways comprises metabolic hormones, which bind to their respective receptors in the D A midbrain to convey the current homeostatic state. In particular, insulin receptors are densely expressed in D A circuits.

Secreted in the pancreas, insulin reaches the C N S through the bloodstream and crosses the blood-brain barrier through a saturable transport system. Rodent studies indicate that a small proportion of insulin is also directly synthesized in the brain, predominantly by neurons and neuronal progenitor cells of the olfactory bulb and the hippocampus. In particular, G A B A-ergic neurogliaform cells have been identified as potential producers of insulin in the C N S. However, whether this C N S-derived insulin is physiologically relevant is still controversial and, so far, there is no evidence for local insulin production in the human brain.

In the brain, insulin receptors are ubiquitously expressed on neurons and glial cells, with the highest density in the olfactory bulb and the limbic areas. In contrast to adult peripheral tissues, where the long receptor isoform B predominates, neurons almost exclusively express the short isoform A, lacking twelve amino acids within the C-terminus of the alpha-subunit, but glial cells primarily express I R-B. In contrast to I R-B, I R-A has a two-fold higher sensitivity for insulin and can also bind I G F-One.


## Two point one. Intracellular pathways activated by insulin

Insulin unfolds its action by binding to the extracellular alpha-subunit of the insulin receptor, which causes dimerization and autophosphorylation of the intracellular beta-subunit.

This induces two canonical signalling pathways: One, the P I three K slash A K T pathway via tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate proteins, or I R S, supported by the adaptor molecule S H two B one and Two, the mitogen-activated protein kinase or M A P K pathways via phosphorylation of Shc and or I R S.

The AKT pathway has a critical role in diverse biological processes including cell proliferation, differentiation, and metabolism. On the one hand, it leads to the assembly of mTORC one, which is critical for regulating mitochondrial metabolism as well as lipid, fatty acid and protein synthesis. On the other hand, the AKT signalling pathway inhibits the activity of the Forkhead box O transcription factor, which regulates glucose and lipid metabolism. However, the exact role of FoxO in the brain is still unclear. IRS one/two in addition to or possibly competing with Shc can also activate the MAPK pathway, which plays a key role in many biological processes like cell proliferation, differentiation, development, transformation, and apoptosis. Both Shc and IRS activate Grb two/Sos complexes, which, in turn, lead to the activation of Ras-Raf-MEK-ERC-cascade and further downstream substrates regulating cell growth-related gene expression and cell proliferation. The relevance of IRS and Shc for activation of the Ras pathways may differ between cell lines and tissues as well as during different stages in brain development and function.

Very recently, a co-receptor called "inceptor" was discovered in the pancreas that is involved in the degradation of insulin receptors on beta- cells through clathrin-mediated endocytosis. The inhibition of this co-receptor has been shown to be associated with higher insulin secretion and a lower peripheral glucose level, hence providing an interesting target for diabetes treatment. Whether this regulatory co-receptor has a relevant role in the brain is an area of current research.


## Two point two. Insulin action in the dopaminergic midbrain

For a very long time, hypothalamic nuclei have been considered the only central target of insulin to assure homeostatic control, which was assumed to be segregated from hedonic (food) reward seeking. However, a wave of fundamental studies has clearly shown that homeostatic information is integrated into the D A midbrain since a) different neuron populations from the lateral hypothalamus and the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus project to the V T A inducing or inhibiting D A release in the V T A and its projection sites depending on the homeostatic state and b) multiple metabolic hormones (including insulin) and nutrients also directly acts in the D A midbrain. Insulin receptors are co-expressed on D A neurons in the midbrain. And indeed, key regulators of the intracellular insulin-signaling pathway such as IRS-two and PI three K/AKT have been identified to play a critical role in D A signalling in V T A neurons.


## Two point two point one. Insulin increases D A T expression and function

Particularly, the PI three K/AKT pathway regulates D A clearance by modulating D A T expression and function. Acute application of insulin to the V T A in vitro reduced somatodendritic D A levels in fast-scan voltammetry through increased D A T clearance in a concentration-dependent manner by activating PI three K and mTOR signalling pathways. In line with this, increased D A T m R N A levels were detected in the V T A after chronic insulin application. In turn, suppression of PI three K signalling, selective D A T inhibition with GBR twelve nine zero nine as well as D A T-knockout inhibited the D A-suppressing effect of insulin.

Two point two point two. Insulin modulates tyrosine hydrolase activity - the rate-limiting enzyme in catecholamine synthesis

Selective knockout of insulin receptors in TH-expressing neurons reduced the expression of TH-m R N A. Moreover, the acute application of insulin on V T A slices directly increases the firing rate of SN/V T A neurons in patch clamp recordings potentially through PI three K-signalling pathways. However, the exact signalling pathways are still unclear.


## Two point two point three. Insulin modulates the excitatory and inhibitory inputs on D A neurons

The VTA receives excitatory glutamatergic input from the prefrontal cortex, lateral dorsal tegmentum, pedunculopontine nucleus, and lateral hypothalamus. Insulin administration in the V T A decreases the excitatory inputs on D A neurons and induces long-term depression via AKT/m TOR signalling and endocannabinoid mediated presynaptic suppression of glutamate release, while the inhibitory GABAergic inputs remain unchanged. This effect could be driven by PPTg inputs to the V T A, as phasic D A release in the NAc evoked by stimulating PPTg inputs to the V T A is suppressed by intra-V T A insulin. This appears in contrast to the facilitating effects of insulin on the firing rate of V T A dopamine neurons. The spontaneous firing frequency was not different between control and insulin-receptor lacking D A neurons, suggesting that basal endogenous insulin signalling does not influence the firing of D A neurons. However, bath application of insulin increased the firing rate of D A neurons. This may occur via intrinsic mechanisms or through reduced inhibition of D two-receptors. It is possible that insulin has a differential impact on tonic and phasic D A release of V T A neurons: Higher firing frequency might increase tonic D A release in low concentrations in the NAc. And the insulin-mediated suppression of excitatory inputs could decrease the ability to produce phasic bursts, which are particularly relevant for the reward-seeking behaviour. However, these are only speculations and need to be systematically investigated in future studies.

To summarise the available data, insulin in the VTA reduces extracellular somatodendritic D A concentrations through increased D A reuptake, reduces LTD of excitatory inputs, and decreases PPTg-evoked D A release in the NAc.


## Two point three. Insulin action in the ventral striatum

In the NAc, D A-projections target G A B A-ergic MSN, which form several subpopulations depending on the expression of D one or D two receptors. The activity of MSNs is modulated by inputs from cholinergic and G A B A-ergic interneurons as well as glial cells. All of these different cell types within the NAc express insulin receptors. Hence, insulin can activate a complex signalling pathway in downstream D A target areas independent of its action in the VTA.


## Two point three point one. Insulin increases D A release and reuptake

Similar to its action on somatodendritic D A release in the VTA, insulin increases D A T surface expression and D A reuptake through PI three K-signalling in the D A terminals. Despite their role in reuptake, D A Ts are also known to mediate AMPH-induced D A-efflux through reversed transport. In line with this, insulin has been shown to facilitate AMPH-stimulated D A release mediated by D A T in hypoinsulinemic mice. In ex-vivo slices of the NAc and the dorsal striatum, Stouffer et al. demonstrated that insulin increases terminal D A release by acting on cholinergic interneurons. Furthermore, acute insulin administration has been shown to stimulate ATP release from astrocytes, which activates purinergic signalling cascades in D A neurons to facilitate D A efflux. Due to the dynamic action of insulin on D A outflow and reuptake, the net effect is difficult to predict. However, Stouffer et al. demonstrated that insulin-mediated D A release is higher than D A reuptake suggesting a positive net effect of insulin on extracellular D A concentrations in D A downstream targets. In line with this, systemic intra-peritoneal application of insulin has been shown to increase D A release in the NAc (thirty minutes after the injection) and the dorsal striatum (eighty minutes after the injection) in a dose-dependent manner. Likewise, I C V administration increased D A-release and D A content in the striatum. More specifically, while insulin application in the striatum has been shown to increase D A release, insulin administration in the VTA induces a long-lasting decrease of D A release in the striatum. Notably, the insulin release after food intake inhibits excitatory synaptic transmission in the VTA for three hours - and hence considerably longer that the duration of the postprandial insulin spike itself - likely underlying the long-lasting depression of D A release in the striatum.


## Two point three point two. Insulin modulates excitatory inputs on MSN

Besides, its direct effect on MSN, insulin has been shown to modulate excitatory transmission on MSN in a concentration-dependent manner. While low physiological insulin concentrations increased excitatory transmission on MSN neurons, high insulin concentrations suppressed excitatory transmission on MSNs.

In summary, the effect of insulin on terminal D A release in the striatum is dependent on the site of administration. While insulin applied in the striatum increases terminal D A release, insulin applied to the VTA suppresses phasic D A release by inhibiting excitatory inputs.


## Two point four. Impact of insulin signalling on reward behaviour in rodents

Unsurprisingly, the aforementioned effects of insulin on D A signalling within the mesolimbic pathway have been linked to changes in reward-seeking behaviour. The differential effects of insulin in the D A midbrain and the downstream targets result in different behavioural alterations depending on the site of insulin administration and the homeostatic status (hungry/sated).


## Two point four point one. The effect of insulin on food approach behavior

Injections of insulin into the VTA decreased food anticipatory behaviour and food approach behaviour in a light-dark box. Insulin infusions in the VTA as well as in the NAc reduced regular chow consumption in rodents. The insulin action in the VTA is dose and time-dependent. While low doses of insulin (zero point zero zero five to zero point five milliunits) do not modulate food intake behaviour, reduced food consumption can only be observed for high insulin levels (five milliunits) in the first twenty-four hours after the intervention. Mebel et al. investigated the influence of hunger and satiety status and demonstrated that five hundred nanomolar insulin applied to the VTA did not modulate regular chow feeding in hungry mice within the first four hours, but rather suppressed sweetened high-fat diet intake when applied in sated mice suggesting that insulin primarily suppresses "hedonic feeding" through modulating reward behaviour. Consistent with this, mice lacking insulin receptors in D A neurons had increased food intake, leading to increased body weight and adiposity.


## Two point four point two. Impact of insulin on reward sensitivity

In rats fed ad libitum intra-VTA application of low levels of insulin increased the threshold for intracranial self-stimulation suggesting reduced reward sensitivity. Opioid-stimulated feeding - a model for hedonic feeding - was only suppressed, when insulin was applied in the VTA. Neither insulin application in the NAc nor in the hypothalamic nuclei showed a similar effect suggesting that this effect is specific to the VTA. I C V-insulin application combined with the D two-receptor antagonist raclopride reduced the lick rate in a sucrose-licking task (fixed-ratio), while insulin alone was not sufficient to induce this effect, confirming that insulin action is dependent on D A signalling. Both I C V and intra-VTA insulin infusions have been shown to inhibit conditioned place preference to a high-fat diet or sweetened froot loops in a concentration-dependent manner in ad-libitum-fed rodents; again suggesting a reduced reward sensitivity.


## Two point four point three. Role of insulin in learning and motivation

Insulin promotes learning of reward associations and consequently forms preferences: Flavor-nutrient-preference learning in food-restricted and ad-libitum mice is dependent on insulin receptor activation in the nucleus accumbens. However, it was revealed that in ad libitum-fed mice intra-ventricular insulin does not impair learning of the reward value of a high-fat diet. But, intra-ventricular insulin inhibits reward retrieval indicating an effect on motivation. A systematic investigation of the differential effect of intranasal insulin application in the core of the nucleus accumbens on cue-triggered food approach and motivation showed that while cue-triggered food approach remained unchanged by insulin, the motivation to spend effort for food was reduced after insulin application.

For effort spending in progressive ratio tasks, the findings were inconsistent though: While some reported no effect after intra-VTA and intra-NAc insulin application, others found reduced motivation after intra-NAc and ICV administration. Findings from ICV-application have to be interpreted with caution, as the insulin effects cannot be attributed to specific brain areas or neuron populations. Here, insulin can either act directly on dopamine-circuitry or indirectly through other insulin receptive brain areas that modulate dopamine-signalling through multisynaptic connections. Moreover, it is important to note that most of the rodent studies used food stimuli to assess reward sensitivity, learning, and motivation. This is simply due to the fact that food stimuli are well-established in rodent assays and are easy to apply. However, an intracranial self-stimulation protocol demonstrated a reward-suppressing effect, indicating that the action of insulin on the brain's dopamine system has implications far beyond food intake and metabolic regulation. These findings demonstrate conclusively that insulin has a reward-suppressing impact via its action on midbrain dopamine neurons,

primarily under conditions of satiety. However, more research is required to delineate the receptors and cell subtypes involved and the different forms of rewarding stimuli such as drugs and social and sexual stimuli that are affected.


## Two point five. Impact of insulin on reward behaviour in humans

Recent human research has provided additional evidence for the insulin-mediated downregulation of reward-related processing. In humans, brain function is generally assessed using functional MRI, which provides a surrogate marker for neuronal and glial activity through quantifying blood hemoglobin oxygenation. The standard procedure to study central insulin effects in humans is through intranasal insulin application, which enters the nasal mucosa and is transported to the central nervous system via diffusion and trans-neuronal transport via olfactory and trigeminal pathways bypassing the blood-brain barrier. The exact temporal dynamics of insulin's effect on neuronal signalling are unclear, however, there is increasing evidence that the main effect is achieved after thirty minutes in a dose-dependent manner.


## Two point five point one. Effect of intranasal insulin on mesocorticolimbic connectivity

Studies using functional MRI have shown that intranasal insulin reduces not only the ratings of food palatability but also modulates the connectivity between the ventral tegmental area and the nucleus accumbens, as well as the functional connectivity between the ventral tegmental area and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. These findings align with several studies that reported alterations in regional activity and connectivity patterns of the reward circuitry after intranasal insulin application. These connectivity changes have been related to peripheral insulin sensitivity and measures of eating behaviour. A combined functional MRI and PET study using the D two and D three-receptor ligand carbon eleven-raclopride directly assessed brain dopamine-signalling. They discovered that intranasal insulin decreased dopamine transmission in the ventral and dorsal striatum. Interestingly, insulin-induced effects in PET imaging were related to functional connectivity changes detected with functional MRI forty-five minutes after intranasal insulin intervention indicating that signal alterations observed in functional MRI are indeed related to dopamine signalling.


## Two point five point two. Effect of insulin on food preference

It was reported that after an overnight fast, blood insulin levels predicted food preference in insulin-sensitive participants: Higher blood insulin levels were associated with lower food liking. This suppressing effect was also evident after intranasal insulin application. In insulin-resistant participants, this association between food preference and blood insulin as well as central insulin was not detectable. Furthermore, the inhibitory effect of intranasal insulin on food preference seems to be sex-dependent: While in normal-weight men, insulin reduced food preference and food intake in the hungry state, this effect was not evident in women neither in pre- nor postmenopausal stage. In contrast, insulin reduced post-prandial snacking and food cravings in women. In line, the neuronal processing of food cues after intranasal insulin application has been demonstrated to depend on body weight and sex.


## Two point five point three. Effect of insulin on motivation

The effect of insulin is not limited to food rewards. Glucagon-like peptide one, which has an insulin-enhancing effect, modulates incentive motivation for both food and money. Of course, this effect is not solely attributable to insulin, since GLP one has direct effects on DA neurons. Furthermore, food intake, elevating insulin levels among other factors, has been shown to reduce susceptibility to non-food rewards and choices in the delay discounting task related to fluctuating blood glucose levels.

To conclude, human data provide clear evidence that central insulin modulates the activity and the connectivity of DA-pathways affecting reward behaviour.


## Three. Impaired insulin signalling and the dopaminergic circuitry

Changes in diet are known to modulate both insulin and DA signaling in mesolimbic pathways. Chronic food restriction reduces circulating insulin levels and baseline DA levels in the mesolimbic circuitry leading to higher reward sensitivity and stronger DA release in response to refeeding. In contrast, high fat diet-induced obesity is associated with hyperinsulinemia but lower baseline and amphetamine-induced DA levels in the NAc compared to healthy normal weight controls. Interestingly, in diet-induced obesity a chow meal is no longer able to induce a DA-response in the NAc, but a high fat diet meal is required to trigger this DA response. So while both food restriction and obesity are associated with reduced baseline DA levels in the striatum, there is a bidirectional effect on insulin-dependent DA release. These observations have sparked attention to the role of insulin in mediating these effects.

Several rodent models have been leveraged to investigate the effects of changed insulin transmission on midbrain DA neurons and their primary projection regions. These models differ in their availability of insulin, the induction of downstream insulin signalling pathways upon binding of insulin to its receptor, receptor availability, and specificity of the intervention.


## Three point one. The impact of insulin deficiency on DA signalling in rodents

Insulin deficiency and its impact on DA signalling are typically studied in a.) rodent models with damaged pancreatic beta cells due to the administration of beta cytotoxics such as streptozotin or alloxan, b.) hereditary models prone to type one diabetes, or c.) rodents after prolonged fasting. Among these models, the streptozotocin-model is most frequently used and involves repeated administration of low doses of streptozotocin resulting in partial damage to the pancreatic islets. This causes chronic inflammation, insulin deficiency and hyperglycaemia, which mimic the pathology of type one diabetes mellitus in humans. An alternative protocol is a single, high-dose administration of streptozotocin, which destroys beta cells completely and does not exhibit human type one diabetes features such as pancreatic insulitis. However, all of these models except for prolonged fasting are generally associated with hyperglycaemia, which directly affects neuronal signaling and insulin receptor sensitivity. Therefore, insulin replacement cannot fully restore function in these models. Moreover, there is growing evidence, that the effect of the beta cytotoxics is not solely attributable to the destruction of beta-cells since a direct ICV application of small doses of alloxan and streptozocin induced changes in the brain DA signalling comparable to the peripheral administration.

Insulin receptor knockout models allow the direct investigation of insulin downstream signalling. Beyond general IR knockout models, targeted knockdown of IR in neurons, astrocytes, or in TH-expressing or DAT-expressing neurons have been leveraged to unravel the action of insulin in the central nervous system and particularly the DA circuitry. Moreover, customized inactivation of IR has also been investigated by administering antibodies into specific brain locations.

Insulin resistance secondary to obesity and metabolic dysregulation is typically investigated after high fat diet, or in rodent strains genetically prone to obesity or diabetes mellitus type two such as the Goto-Kakizaki rat or the spontaneously diabetic Torii and the Wistar rats. High fat diet has a clear impact on insulin signaling in DA pathways as evidenced by reduced phosphorylation of AKT in striatal and nigral brain slices. Nonetheless, it is essential to note that both high fat diet and obesity result in a number of metabolic and inflammatory changes that can additionally affect DA signaling. Furthermore, high fat diet regimes differ in their duration and composition (e.g. fifty percent of daily kcal requirements from fat vs. sixty percent from fat; saturated vs. unsaturated fat) leading to heterogeneous findings and making it challenging to attribute findings solely to insulin changes.


## Three point two. The impact of insulin resistance in the dopaminergic midbrain

Three point two point one. Insulin resistance changes TH-activity

In the VTA, both lack of insulin due to streptozotocin-induced destruction of pancreatic beta cells as well as impaired IR signalling due to knock-out or inhibition in TH-containing neurons reduce the expression of TH messenger RNA indicating reduced DA synthesis. Similarly, TH activity in terminal fields of DA neurons is suppressed in diabetic rodents after high fat diet and genetic models of diabetes.


## Three point two point two. Insulin resistance affects DA-turnover

Food restriction for twenty-four to thirty-six hours leading to reduced insulin levels has been demonstrated to diminish DAT messenger RNA amounts in the VTA and SN, indicating decreased DA turnover. Moreover, insulin fails to increase the firing frequency of DA neurons if the insulin receptor is inactivated and neuronal IR knockout mice show increased levels of monoamine oxidase A and B leading to increased DA and other monoamines degradation in these areas. In situations of transient or prolonged hyperinsulinemia, insulin loses its ability to induce long-term depression of excitatory synapses onto VTA DA neurons. Notably, seven days of high fat diet were sufficient to induce insulin resistance in the VTA as demonstrated by reduced AKT phosphorylation in the VTA upon intracerebroventricular injection of insulin.

Collectively, insulin deficiency and insulin resistance reduce DA synthesis, DA reuptake, depression of excitatory inputs on DA neurons, and the firing frequency of DA neurons in the VTA.


## Three point three. The impact of insulin resistance in the ventral striatum

Three point three point one. Insulin resistance changes evoked DA release

In the ventral striatum, impaired insulin signalling reduces DA release in response to stimuli (food, electrical or insulin); this effect is evident in neuron-specific IR knock-out mice and high-fat-diet-induced insulin resistance. However, it is important to note, that Fordahl could not detect any change in evoked DA release in insulin-resistant rodents.


## Three point three point two. Insulin dysregulation impacts baseline DA levels

Equally to evoked DA release, reports about baseline DA concentrations in the N-Ac are heterogeneous: While Kleinridders could not detect any differences in DA content (but only in DA release) between rodents with low insulin levels (prolonged fasting) and insulin resistance (high-fat diet) compared to normal insulin sensitivity, Chen observed lower baseline DA levels in insulin resistance. As Oginsky pointed out, a considerable source of heterogeneity in rodent studies might be caused by the various rodent strains and their susceptibility to weight gain, because intrinsic excitability of N-Ac core neurons differs between obesity-susceptible and -resistant rats. It is generally assumed that reduced excitatory synaptic transmission on M-S-Ns is a key mechanism by which insulin resistance abolishes the capability of insulin to increase DA release in the ventral striatum. In line, the modulation of M-S-N activity was attenuated in NIRKO mice and DA release in the N-Ac is equally decreased if insulin signalling in N-Ac astrocytes is disrupted leading to reduced ATP exocytosis and purinergic signalling cascades in DA neurons.


## Three point three point three. Insulin resistance reduces DA turnover

Insulin resistance reduces D-A-T expression, and DA reuptake via attenuated A-K-T signalling. Moreover, selective inhibition of the insulin receptor has been shown to attenuate DA reuptake. The observation that both lack of insulin due to prolonged starvation and prolonged hyperinsulinemia reduce dopamine reuptake indicates that hyperinsulinemia leads to a desensitization of the I-R and impacts downstream signalling pathways, that control D-A-T expression. This effect is time-dependent. While two weeks of high-fat diet did not have an effect, six weeks of high-fat diet reduced D-A-T levels in the synaptosomal membrane-associated fractions. Notably, the effects of insulin resistance are reversible. Eight weeks of aerobic exercise restored insulin A-K-T/G-S-K-three-beta signalling, baseline DA levels, and DA release after food intake.

Taken together, reduced insulin signalling/insulin resistance in the N-Ac reduces DA release and DA reuptake in DA axon terminals.


## Three point four. Effect of insulin resistance on reward behaviour and food intake in rodents

To date, only a few studies have examined how compromised insulin signalling in the mesolimbic pathways affects reward behaviour and food intake.


## Three point four point one. Insulin resistance modulated food intake behavior

Selective inactivation of IR in V-T-A/S-N DA neurons increases food intake, resulting in higher fat mass and body weight. In line, insulin depletion in S-T-Z-treated mice and insulin resistance after high-fat diet resulted in increased food approach behaviour. In fact, increased calorie intake after high-fat diet was associated with impaired A-K-T signalling and reduced striatal D-A-T expression indicating an I-R-dependent mechanism. In line with this, viral rescue of A-K-T signalling and striatal DA expression decreased calorie intake. However, there are also opposing findings. In congenital IR knockouts in DA neurons, there was no difference in daily calorie intake, body weight or energy metabolism, suggesting that the alterations in food intake and body weight by I-R signalling are not solely attributable to the DA system.


## Three point four point two. Insulin resistance impacts the motivation to work for food

In line with increased food intake, the motivation to work for food increases with insulin resistance. Rats fed a high-fat diet for five weeks exhibited more lever presses in a progressive ratio task using sucrose reward, and I-C-V insulin was unable to suppress this effect. Furthermore, obese insulin-resistant O-L-E-T-F rats exhibited increased operant performance for sucrose reward. This is in contradiction, however, with evidence for reduced sucrose preference in insulin resistance. Moreover, McNeilly demonstrated that three to four weeks of high-fat diet, sufficient to induce insulin resistance, diminished the motivation to respond for sucrose pallets in Wistar rats. This deficit was ameliorated, but not totally reversed, by a dietary intervention (chow diet) that restored insulin sensitivity. However, it is significant to note that McNeilly did not carry out a conventional progressive ratio task. They performed a delayed matching to place and a delay-non-matching to place operant task, that require cognitive flexibility and working memory, both of which are known to be impaired in obesity and insulin resistance without being related explicitly to DA-signalling.


## Three point four point three. Insulin resistance has an impact on reward sensitivity

The effect of insulin on motivation and reward sensitivity goes beyond food intake. Insulin deficiency due to fasting increased reward sensitivity in an intracranial self-stimulation task. This effect was reversed by insulin and leptin administration. Equally, insulin deficiency due to S-T-Z-application increased reward sensitivity, but only in the first three weeks. Afterward, this effect was abolished or even turned to the opposite showing reduced reward sensitivity. In this case, insulin application improved reward sensitivity. Equally high-fat diet for fifteen to seventeen weeks reduced the attraction of male rodents to female urine, that is normally perceived as rewarding indicating that insulin resistance over a longer period of time leads to anhedonia - the loss of experiencing pleasure from usually rewarding activities.


## Three point four point four. Insulin resistance leads to a depressive, anxious phenotype

Moreover, insulin resistance has been associated with behavioural despair and anxious behaviour. In life-threatening situations, insulin-resistant mice showed increased immobility in the tail-suspension test and the forced swim test and avoided exploratory behaviour in the open field task and during exposition to novel food stimuli indicating anxiety.


## Three point four point five. Insulin resistance impairs preference formation

There is accumulating evidence that insulin plays an important role in learning and preference formation. During flavour-nutrient conditioning, a previously neutral flavour is associated with a positive postingestive consequence to form a preference for the flavour. While insulin-sensitive rodents fed ad libitum or after food restriction are able to establish flavour preferences, this effect is abolished in insulin resistance following HFD. Particularly, after HFD, there was less IR activation in the NAc after intragastric glucose infusion. Similarly, flavour-nutrient conditioning was inhibited after deactivating insulin bilaterally in the NAc via local administration of insulin antibodies. To differentiate whether this observation was driven by a change in motivation or indeed by a change in the learned reward value, Carr analysed the microstructure of licking for glucose: Insulin antibodies did not affect the number of lick bursts emitted, but decreased the size of lick bursts. This effect was shown to depend on previous flavoured glucose consumption under insulin antibody treatment rather than on insulin antibody treatment per se, indicating that impaired insulin signalling in the NAc shell impairs learning by diminishing the estimated reward value rather than motivation per se.


## Three point four point six. The effect of insulin resistance on motor activity

Several models using insulin resistance after HFD or IR knockout in DA neurons or astrocytes did not show any changes in voluntary motor activity. In STZ-diabetic mice, however, the results are very inconsistent, providing evidence for reduced, increased, and unaffected spontaneous locomotor behaviour, which might be related to the large variability in STZ-protocols in terms of timing, dosage and strains. These findings suggest that the shortage of insulin availability and the resistance of insulin receptors have differential effects on motor activity.

Collectively, impaired insulin signalling increases food approach, attenuates value formation and preference learning and promotes anhedonia and anxious behaviour. However, it is important to consider,

that many aspects of reward-seeking behaviour that are distorted by impaired insulin signalling cannot be solely attributed to DA signalling in the VTA or NAc but are also related to their interaction with further brain systems.


## Three point five. Effect of insulin resistance on reward behaviour in humans

There is no direct measure of central insulin resistance in humans. Using fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography, Antony discovered that glucose metabolism in regions subserving appetite and reward, including the mesostriatal system, is impaired in response to peripheral insulin administration in diabetes patients compared to healthy controls. This indicates that peripherally measured insulin resistance can be used as a surrogate for central insulin resistance. Since PET using radioactive ligands is limited in its accessibility, fMRI has emerged as a valuable tool for studying changes in brain signalling associated with insulin resistance. In fact, using resting state fMRI data, we demonstrated that the modulation of midbrain connectivity by intranasal insulin is compromised in participants with decreased peripheral insulin sensitivity.


## Three point five point one. Insulin resistance changes food preference

Tiedemann showed that nondiabetic participants with incipient insulin resistance have a lower preference for food items than healthy controls along with diminished activation of the NAc. At the same time, others reported that food-specific responses within the basal ganglia including the NAc are significantly greater in participants with insulin resistance or type two diabetes than in healthy controls. Stronger activation in the NAc was related to higher appetite ratings. Besides the immediate response to food cues, the anticipatory response has also been shown to increase proportionally with BMI and insulin resistance. However, these studies have to be interpreted with care, because they included small sample sizes and differ in the fasting conditions and study populations. Studies assessing the modulation of the brain response to food pictures by insulin have been more consistent: both intranasal insulin, as well as a glucose challenge, fail to decrease the brain signal to food pictures in insulin-resistant participants indicating that the ability of insulin to curb food intake by reducing the salience of highly palatable food cues may be impaired. In line with this, during fasted conditions, intranasal insulin failed to decrease wanting for food in insulin-resistant participants. However, a recent study demonstrated that in postprandial conditions, a high dose of one hundred sixty IU intranasal insulin reduced snacking in overweight women with insulin resistance suggesting that sufficiently high doses of intranasal insulin may enhance satiety signalling and compensate for reduced central insulin sensitivity.


## Three point five point two. Impact of insulin resistance on learning and motivation

As observed in rodent studies, the effects of insulin resistance on brain DA signalling are not limited to food intake behaviour. Lower beta-cell function and lower insulin sensitivity were related to increased delayed reward discounting indicating more impulsive choices preferring a small, immediate monetary reward, over a larger, delayed reward. In line, more impulsive behaviour in the stop signal task of insulin-resistant subjects was mediated by striatal activation. Furthermore, overweight and obesity, which can be concomitant with insulin resistance, are associated with impaired learning from negative feedback. Human studies reveal that insulin resistance also affects motivation. The influence of insulin on motivation highly depends on a person's satiety/hunger state of the organism: while hunger is associated with higher motivation for reward in insulin-sensitive humans, this effect gets lost in insulin-resistant humans. Interventions improving insulin signalling (such as GLP-1 analogues) restore the effect of hunger on motivation in insulin-resistant humans. Importantly, this holds true for both food and monetary reward, indicating that insulin resistance not only impairs food related behaviour but is relevant for pathological states characterized by generally diminished motivational behaviour.

Collectively, and aligned with the preclinical findings, impaired insulin signalling in humans impairs food cue reactivity, learning and nutritional state-dependent motivation for reward.


## Four. Clinical link to depression

Given the influence of insulin and insulin resistance on reward behaviour, it is unsurprising that epidemiological studies have established a clear link between diabetes and depression and in particular anhedonia. Multiple meta-analyses showed a strong relationship between depression/anhedonia and obesity (which is associated with insulin resistance). Indeed, longitudinal studies demonstrated, that obesity increased the risk of experiencing depressive symptoms one to five years later, indicating a causal role on an epidemiological level. Interestingly, this association was not explained by socio-demographic, lifestyle, or illness-related factors, including systemic inflammation suggesting that metabolic dysregulation (and potentially insulin resistance) may play a direct role in the pathophysiology of depressive symptoms. Indeed, recent meta-analyses bridge the link between obesity and depression showing that insulin resistance increases the risk for depression: The prevalence of depression is increased to nineteen point one percent (range six point five to thirty-three percent) for people with type II diabetes compared to ten point seven percent (range three point eight to nineteen point four percent) in people without diabetes. This is further supported by genetic studies, that report a genetic overlap between obesity, type II diabetes, and depression.

The link between insulin resistance and depression is bidirectional. In depressed patients, both insulin levels and the Homeostatic Model Assessment for insulin resistance - a proxy for peripheral insulin resistance - are elevated during the acute episode but not during remission. Insulin resistance is associated with increased disease severity and compromised antidepressant treatment efficacy. In a sub-analysis, Fernandes et al. revealed that in particular "atypical depression" is linked to increased insulin resistance. Although the concept of "atypical depression" (mood reactivity, hyperphagia, hypersomnia, interpersonal difficulty) is still under debate, notably increased appetite and weight gain belong to the core features of this subtype. In fact, about thirty-five percent of major depressive disorder patients report increased appetite during a depressive episode, and about twenty percent of major depressive disorder patients gain weight. Moreover, weight gain across depressive episodes is highly correlated within patients, suggesting a trait-like character. Therefore, it is unclear whether increased food intake results in reduced peripheral insulin sensitivity, or rather insulin resistance leads to mesolimbic dysregulation that is known to drive food intake. Supporting the latter hypothesis, Simmons et al. discovered that increased appetite in major depressive disorder patients was related to insulin resistance and low-grade inflammation (IL-1RA and IL-6) although the body mass index was not different from patients with reduced appetite. In fact, the extent of insulin resistance correlated with the insular cortex response to food cues. In a large sample of four hundred major depressive disorder patients, Kroemer et al. confirmed that the direction of appetite change is characterised by a specific neuronal signature. In resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging data, they found different nucleus accumbens functional connectivity patterns between patients with increased and reduced appetite; this study however did not consider metabolic parameters. Beyond appetite changes, anhedonia was found to be strongly linked with poor glycaemic control (odds ratio one point twenty-nine, ninety-five percent confidence interval one point zero nine to one point fifty-two) in five thousand seven hundred seventy-two major depressive disorder patients, but in a smaller sample of six hundred four participants with type one and three hundred eighty-two participants with type two diabetes, Ehrmann et al. could not replicate this finding.


## Four point one. The molecular mechanisms linking diabetes and depression

Despite the clear link between diabetes and depression on an epidemiological level, the molecular mechanisms remain unknown. Given the aforementioned evidence on DA-insulin interaction, impaired DA signalling in conditions of central insulin resistance has been proposed as a potential mechanism between depressive and anxious symptoms. In the last few years, a wave of fundamental rodent studies has provided evidence that insulin resistance in brain DA pathways can lead to depressive and anxious symptoms. This has been shown across different models of insulin resistance including high fat diet-induced insulin resistance, streptozotocin-induced diabetes, and insulin receptor knockout in neurons or glial cells.

Kleinridders et al. reported that brain/neuron insulin receptor knockout (NIRKO) mice, show age-dependent depressive and anxious behaviour due to impaired mitochondrial function and increased DA turnover by MAO, which is normally suppressed by insulin. Insulin receptor knock-out in glial cells, in turn, reduces ATP exocytosis, resulting in decreased purinergic signalling on DA neurons and subsequently anxiety- and depressive-like behaviour. Mechanistically, a subsequent hyperdopaminergic state within the amygdala is probably responsible for the increase in anxiety observed in insulin-resistant and diabetic rats. Interestingly, down-regulation of the insulin receptor in the hypothalamus can also induce depressive-like behaviour in rodents indicating that insulin signalling in the hypothalamus might also affect DA signalling in the midbrain.


## Four point two. Therapeutic approaches targeting insulin pathways

Based on the molecular evidence for the role of impaired insulin signalling in the development of depressive and anxious symptoms, these behavioural changes respond to treatments altering metabolic state and dopamine signalling: In insulin receptor knockout mice, depressive and anxious behaviour is reversed by monoamine oxidase inhibitors. In STZ-induced diabetes, depressive symptoms were reduced by insulin therapy, with some (but not all) studies indicating the same impact on anxiety. Furthermore, physical activity and food restriction, as well as the insulin sensitizers rosiglitazone or pioglitazone alleviated depressive-like behaviour in insulin-resistant rodents. Despite these promising animal results, the therapeutic link between insulin, dopamine and depression has hardly been examined in humans. Mansur et al. demonstrated, that being overweight moderated the association between reduced effort spending (which is dopamine-dependent) and major depressive disorder. Moreover, a single intranasal insulin administration has been shown to improve mood in overweight or obese women without psychiatric conditions. Equally, repeated administration of intranasal insulin across eight weeks improved mood in obese and normal-weight participants without depression. Furthermore, diabetes and overweight attenuate the responsiveness to classical antidepressants and adjunctive therapies that enhance insulin sensitivity including both lifestyle (exercise) and dietary intervention improve antidepressant treatment response, even if peripheral insulin resistance is not used for treatment stratification. A similar effect has been reported for adjunctive therapy with insulin sensitizers. Moreover, in the state of insulin resistance, different classes of antidepressants show distinct treatment efficacy and suppressing or enhancing effects on blood glucose levels and body weight indicating that the choice of antidepressant therapy should be influenced by the metabolic state. However, clinical trials targeting this question are still lacking. Overall, current data regarding the association between antidepressant-specific mechanism-of-action and effects on metabolic state and depressive symptoms, remain inconclusive but imply that selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors might have the best anti-depressive effect in the state of insulin resistance and have a beneficial effect on insulin sensitivity.

Notably, altered dopamine signalling is only one potential pathway that links insulin resistance and depression. There are several other factors that contribute to this bidirectional link including impairments in serotonergic transmission, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, neurogenesis, inflammation, opioid-mediated pathways, gut microbiome and gut-brain signalling, which are important, but beyond the scope of this review. Nevertheless, these presented findings are collectively of high preclinical and clinical relevance as they point toward a metabolic subtype of depression, in which increased insulin resistance might function as a state marker. Targeting insulin resistance in depression might serve as an important avenue toward a personalized medicine approach in psychiatry.


## Five. Conclusions

Overall, dopamine signalling in the midbrain and consequently the dopamine encoded reward behaviour is modulated by insulin signalling. The effect of insulin on dopamine release, turn-over, and firing rate might seem contradictory at first glance, but this is due to the differential effects of insulin on the somato-dendritic spines in the midbrain and the axonal terminals in the striatum. Different rodent models of insulin resistance have provided clear evidence that insulin resistance leads to altered dopamine signalling and impaired reward behaviour. This might represent one critical mechanism in the bidirectional link between insulin resistance and depression. Hence, a detailed molecular understanding of the regulation of dopamine signalling by insulin will lay the basis for therapeutic advances in the metabolic treatment of depressive disorders.