## RESEARCH

RESEARCH ARTICLE SUMMARY


## EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY DNA methylation networks underlying mammalian traits

INTRODUCTION: Comparative epigenomics is an emerging field that combines epigenetic signatures with phylogenetic relationships to elucidate species characteristics such as maximum life span. For this study, we generated cytosine DNA methylation profiles from three hundred forty-eight mammalian species using a methylation array platform that targets highly conserved cytosines.

RATIONALE: Nature has evolved mammalian species of greatly differing life spans. To resolve the relationship of DNAm with maximum life span and phylogeny, we performed a large-scale cross-species unsupervised analysis. Comparative studies in many species enables the identification of epigenetic correlates of maximum life span and other traits.

RESULTS: We first tested whether DNAm levels in highly conserved cytosines captured phylogenetic relationships among species. We constructed phyloepigenetic trees that paralleled the traditional phylogeny. To avoid potential confounding by different tissue types, we generated tissue-specific phyloepigenetic trees. The high phyloepigenetic-phylogenetic congru is due to differences in methylation levels is not confounded by sequence conservation.

We then interrogated the extent to which DNA methylation associates with specific biological traits. We used an unsupervised weighted correlation network analysis to identify clusters of highly correlated CpGs. WGCNA identified fifty-five distinct comethylation modules, of which thirty were significantly associated with traits including maximum life span, adult weight, age, sex, human mortality risk, or perturbations that modulate murine life span.

Both the epigenome-wide association analysis and eigengene-based analysis identified methylation signatures of maximum life span, and most of these were independent of aging, presumably set at birth, and could be stable predictors of life span at any point in life. Several CpGs that are more highly methylated in long-lived species are located near HOXL subclass homeoboxes and other genes that play a role in morphogenesis and development. Some of these life span-related CpGs are located next to genes that are also implicated in our analysis of upstream regulators. CpGs with methylation levels that are inversely related to life span are enriched in transcriptional start site and promoter flanking associated chromatin states. Genes located in chromatin state TSS1 are constitutively active and enriched for nucleic acid metabolic processes. This suggests that long-living species evolved mechanisms that maintain low methylation levels in these chromatin states that would favor higher expression levels of genes essential for an organism's survival.

The upstream regulator analysis of the EWAS of life span identified the pluripotency transcription factors OCT4, SOX2, and NANOG. Other factors, such as POLII, CTCF, RAD21, showed the strongest enrichment for negatively life span-related CpGs.

CONCLUSION: The phyloepigenetic trees indicate that divergence of DNA methylation profiles closely parallels that of genetics through evolution. Our results demonstrate that DNA methylation is subjected to evolutionary pressures and selection. The publicly available data from our Mammalian Methylation Consortium are a rich source of information for different fields such as evolutionary biology, developmental biology, and aging.


## RESEARCH

RESEARCH ARTICLE


## EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY DNA methylation networks underlying mammalian traits

Using DNA methylation profiles from three hundred forty-eight mammalian species, we constructed phyloepigenetic trees that bear marked similarities to traditional phylogenetic ones. Using unsupervised clustering across all samples, we identified fifty-five distinct cytosine modules, of which thirty are related to traits such as maximum life span, adult weight, age, sex, and human mortality risk. Maximum life span is associated with methylation levels in HOXL subclass homeobox genes and developmental processes and is potentially regulated by pluripotency transcription factors. The methylation state of some modules responds to perturbations such as caloric restriction, ablation of growth hormone receptors, consumption of high-fat diets, and expression of Yamanaka factors. This study reveals an intertwined evolution of the genome and epigenome that mediates the biological characteristics and traits of different mammalian species.

Comparative epigenomics is a burgeoning field that integrates epigenetic signatures with phylogenetic relationships to decipher gene-to-trait functions. Prior research has investigated the capacity of DNA methylation patterns in regulatory sequences to reflect evolutionary relationships among species. A recent study compared methylation data across multiple animal species at orthologous gene promoters using a sequencing-based assay that did not specifically target conserved CpGs. Previous investigations faced limitations regarding the measurement platform, particularly the low sequencing depth at conserved CpGs and the sample size per species.

Our study overcomes these constraints in several ways. First, we used a measurement platform ensuring high effective sequencing depth at conserved CpGs, allowing for a more precise analysis of DNAm patterns in highly conserved DNA regions. Second, we increased the sample size per species, aiming for many samples per species. We profiled three hundred forty-eight species from twenty-five of the twenty-six mammalian taxonomic orders. This comprehensive dataset enables examination of phylogenetic relationships, comethylation relationships between cytosines, and their associations with maximum life span and other species characteristics.

We profiled fifteen thousand four hundred fifty-six samples using a methylation array platform that provides effective sequencing depth at highly conserved CpGs across mammalian species. This dataset is the product of the multinational Mammalian Methylation Consortium. In previous studies, we applied supervised machine learning methods to generate DNAm-based predictors of age called epigenetic clocks for numerous species.

Here, we performed a large-scale cross-species unsupervised analysis of the entire dataset to reveal the relationship of DNAm with mammalian phylogeny. We show that we could construct phyloepigenetic trees that parallel traditional phylogenetic ones. We then proceed to interrogate the extent to which DNAm underpins specific biological traits by using unsupervised weighted correlation network analysis to minimize the influence of bias on our observations. This approach identifies modules of comethylated CpGs comethylation that are associated with species characteristics, including taxonomy, tissue type, sex, life span, and aging.


## Results Evolution and DNAm

We generated a dataset consisting of DNAm profiles of fifteen thousand four hundred fifty-six DNA samples derived from seventy tissue types from three hundred forty-eight mammalian species using the mammalian methylation array. We evaluated whether methylation levels of cytosines in DNA sequences that are conserved across species would allow us to construct what could be called a phyloepigenetic tree. To avoid potential confounding by different tissue types, we generated tissue-specific phyloepigenetic trees. We defined the "congruence" between traditional phylogenetic trees and phyloepigenetic trees as the Pearson correlation coefficient between distances based on phyloepigenetic trees and evolutionary


## RESEARCH

gruence in liver (one hundred fifty-eight species) and skin (one hundred thirty-three species) may have been due to potential variability in sampling between species. The varying congruence across tissue types shows that the CpG probes do not serve as genotyping proxies. The tissue dependence of congruence distances in traditional phylogenetic trees. We observed high congruence (zero point nine three) for the blood-based phyloepigenetic tree (one hundred twenty-four species) and lower congruence values for nonblood tissues (congruence equals zero point five eight for liver and zero point seven two for skin). The lower conindicates that phyloepigenetic trees are derived based on differences in methylation levels and not sequence conservation. This point was also corroborated by three sensitivity analyses, which confirmed that the high congruence was indeed due to differences in methylation levels


## RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE

RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE

(see the supplementary text). In particular, the phyloepigenetic trees based on the one hundred eighty CpGs with the most significant detection P values across all three hundred forty-eight species still are congruent with traditional trees.

To identify CpGs that exhibit a pronounced phylogenetic signal in relation to methylation and phylogenetic trees, we used Blomberg's K statistic. Among the top five hundred CpGs showing significant phylogenetic signals, selected by variance Z score, we observed an enrichment in upstream intergenic regions. To further investigate regions with the strongest phylogenetic signal, we divided the data into groups relative to the transcriptional start sites. This analysis also confirmed that intergenic regions exhibit significant phylogenetic signals, whereas the promoter regions did not show such signals.


## DNAm networks relate to individual and species traits

We used signed W-G-C-N-A, an unsupervised analysis, to cluster CpGs with similar methylation dynamics across samples into comethylation modules. We then summarized their methylation profiles as "module eigengenes." The respective eigengenes of these modules were used to identify their potential correlations with various traits within and across mammalian species.

Our data analysis proceeded in two sequential phases. First, we developed several comethylation networks using data from eleven thousand ninety-nine DNA samples from one hundred seventy-four species (discovery dataset finalized March twenty twenty-one). A eutherian network, network one was formed from fourteen thousand seven hundred five conserved CpGs using this dataset. Later, we generated a second dataset of four thousand three hundred fifty-seven samples from thirty tissues of two hundred forty mammalian species (one hundred seventy-four new species and sixty-six that are represented in the discovery set), which were not used to define modules and were used as an independent validation set. All eutherian modules were present in the independent validation dataset according to module preservation statistics, validating the presence of these modules, cor K-M-E greater than zero point four three, P is less than ten to the negative twenty-second power, median cor K-M-E equals zero point eight four. These modules were designated with colors according to W-G-C-N-A convention. The smallest module, lavenderblush three, consisted of thirty-three CpGs and the largest, turquoise, had one thousand eight hundred sixty-four CpGs.

To characterize the fifty-five modules with respect to species characteristics, such as maximum life span and average adult weight, module eigengenes were calculated in all samples, discovery and validation set combined, three hundred thirty-one eutherian species. Because information on taxonomic order, tissues, maximum life span, age, sex and adult weight of each species was available,

we were able to assess whether any of the module eigengenes correlated with these traits. Of the fifty-five modules, thirty were found to be correlated with at least one trait. Specifically, fifteen modules were related to taxonomic orders such as primates, rodents, or carnivores. Ten modules related to tissue type, two to sex, one to age, seven to maximum life span, and four to average adult species weight. Some modules were related to multiple characteristics. In the following sections, we mainly focus on the modules that relate to mammalian maximum life span, adult weight, and age. Other modules related to taxonomic order, tissue type, and sex are described in the supplementary materials. We performed two analyses to ascertain whether these eutherian modules are also applicable to marsupials and monotremes. Using the discovery dataset, we first trained a network, network two in both eutherians and marsupials based on only seven thousand nine hundred fifty-six probes that are mappable to both. The color bands under the hierarchical tree reveal that all the network one modules were also preserved in network two. Second, we selected CpGs in network one modules that were also mapped to marsupials or monotremes and confirmed that their eigengene relationships to primary traits were retained in these mammalian clades. For example, the magenta module, which is related to blood in eutherians, was also found to be so in monotremes, which confirms that the network one modules can indeed be applied to other mammalian clades by selecting probes that are also mapped to those clades.

A functional enrichment study, accounting for the mammalian array background, revealed that the genes neighboring to module CpGs are implicated in many biological processes including development, immune function, metabolism, reproduction, stem cell biology, stress responses, aging, and various signaling pathways.


## Relationship with protein-protein interactions

We investigated whether the proteins encoded by cognate genes, closest to respective CpGs, within modules are known to mutually interact or predicted to do so by S-T-R-I-N-G protein-protein interaction networks, which integrate known and predicted protein associations from greater than fourteen thousand organisms. A permutation test analysis evaluating the global cluster coefficient of each module showed that fourteen modules are significantly enriched, P is less than point zero zero one, for genes encoding mutually interacting proteins. Overall, these results suggest that comethylation relationships can be reflected at the protein level for a subset of modules.


## Modules related to maximum life span

To adjust for potential confounders, we used four regression modeling approaches to identify modules that are associated with the log-transformed maximum life span, dependent variable: (i) a univariate regression model with a covariate that was the module eigengene, averaged per species; (ii) a phylogenetic regression model with a covariate that was again the module eigengene, averaged per species; (iii) a multivariate linear regression model that included the module eigengene, sex, tissue, and relative age as covariates; and (iv) model approach (i) applied to specific tissue types.

The marginal analysis identified four modules: magenta, black, midnightblue, and tan, that related significantly to maximum life span, the absolute value of the Pearson correlation exceeded R equals zero point six, Student's T test P is less than one times ten to the negative thirty-third power. The CpGs underlying the implicated modules exhibit the sample patterns, as can be seen from corresponding heatmaps. Phylogenetic regression also identified associations of the same modules. Our fourth modeling approach, i.e., the tissue-stratified marginal analysis, indicates that the relationship of modules to maximum life span is often tissue specific. For example, the magenta and midnightblue modules relate to maximum life span in lung and liver. By contrast, the black module relates to maximum life span only in skin, and the tan module exhibited a weak relationship to life span in the tissue-specific analysis.

For ease of comprehension, modules were labeled with the trait and direction of relationship by superscript plus and minus signs; for example, magenta is the Lifespan plus Weight "B l o c d to the power of plus" module. The two modules (magenta with four hundred eighty CpGs, and midnightblue with two hundred forty-nine CpGs) that correlated with life span in lung and liver also correlated significantly with average adult weight across all eutherian species "R equals zero point four seven" to zero point five five, "P is less than one times ten to the power of negative eighteen" Fig. three). The magenta module (Lifespan plus Weight plus Blood plus) is enriched with developmental genes such as HOXA5, VEGFA, SOX2, and WNT eleven (table S4). The midnightblue (Lifespan plus Weight plus) module implicates genes involved in transfer RNA metabolism "P equals two times ten to the power of negative six", e.g., URMI), lipopolysaccharides "P equals five times ten to the power of negative six", e.g., CERCAM), development "P equals ten to the power of negative four", e.g., the "H O X L" gene family), and fatty acids "P equals two times ten to the power of negative three", e.g., ACADVL). The magenta module also relates to life span and average weight of dog breeds "R equals negative zero point three zero", "P equals zero point zero zero three"; Fig. three C). Furthermore, it is related to the hazard of human death [hazard ratio "H R" equals zero point nine one, Meta P equals zero point zero zero one six; Fig. three D) in epidemiological cohort studies.

After adjustment for phylogeny, the cyan module relates to mammalian life span phylogenetic contrast "R equals zero point four two", "P equals four times ten to the power of negative fourteen" fig. S thirteen I). The Lifespan plus Liver (cyan) module consists of genes that play a role in adaptive immunity "P equals two times ten to the power of negative six", histone and protein demethylation "P equals zero point zero zero zero one", and metabolism "P equals zero point zero zero zero four" (table S4).

sake of visualization, the analysis was limited to the top fifty CpGs with the highest module membership value per module. Colors indicate mammalian Net one. The lollipop plot shows the global cluster coefficient (thirty-six) of the proteins within a module (up to five hundred top CpGs) in a PPI network. Our permutation analysis matched the distribution of the original module sizes. We evaluated eleven hundred random permutations, i.e., twenty for each of the fifty-five modules. The boxplot reports the global clustering coefficient per module (y axis) versus permutation status: module resulting from a random selection of proteins (left) versus original module resulting from WGCNA (right). The modules with cluster coefficients larger than the maximum permutation cluster coefficient were considered as significant at P equals zero point zero zero one. The dashed vertical line corresponds to the maximum global clustering coefficient observed in the eleven hundred random permutations.

P value. (D) Forest plots of the top modules associated with mortality risk in the Framingham Heart Study Offspring Cohort, and Women's Health Initiative study totaling four thousand six hundred fifty-one individuals (one thousand ninety-five, twenty-four percent death). N denotes the number of deaths per total number of individuals in each study. We report the meta-analysis P value in the title of the forest plot. (E) Module that correlates significantly P is less than one times ten to the negative three hundred with relative age (defined as ratio of age over maximum life span) across mammalian species using a multivariate regression model. Covariates were tissue, sex, and species differences. Each dot corresponds to a eutherian tissue sample N equals fourteen thousand five hundred forty-two. Dots are colored by taxonomic order as in Figure one. (F) Volcano plot of the repeated-measures correlation of all purple module genes in Genotype-Tissue Expression data.

The multivariate model analysis included sex, tissue type, and relative age as covariates to reveal additional modules that relate to life span in different tissues. The regression analysis found two modules with opposing correlations with maximum life span: the green module (life span R equals zero point four two, average weight R equals zero point three eight, P is less than one times ten to the negative three hundred) and the greenyellow module (life span R equals negative zero point four four, average weight R equals negative zero point three five, P is less than one times ten to the negative three hundred). The CpGs of the Lifespan Weight Rodentia (greenyellow) are located near genes that play a role in development P equals five times ten to the negative thirteen and in RNA metabolism.

P equals six times ten to the negative twelve. Age-related consensus module in mammals

The purple module (denoted subsequently as RelativeAge+ module) exhibited the strongest positive correlation with relative age (relative age R equals zero point three five, P is less than one times ten to the negative three hundred).

To remove the confounding effects of species and/or tissue type, we also constructed seven consensus networks (denoted cNet three, cNet four, and cNet six; for a description, see the supplementary materials). The RelativeAge+ module was preserved in three different consensus networks (cNet three, cNet four, and cNet six), suggesting conservation in different species and tissues. The purple RelativeAge+ module is positively enriched for CpGs in regulatory regions (e.g., promoters and five-prime untranslated regions) and depleted in intron regions. Functional enrichment of this module highlighted embryonic stem cell regulation, axonal fasciculation, angiogenesis, and diabetes-related pathways. The CpGs in this module are adjacent to Polycomb repressor complex two targets, which are marked by H3K27me3.

Ingenuity pathway analysis implicated POU5F1 (alias OCT4), SHH, ASCL1, SOX2, and NEUROG2 proteins as putative upstream regulators of the RelativeAge+ module. We used Genotype-Tissue Expression project data to determine whether the mRNA levels of any of these upstream regulators are altered with age in several human tissues. OCT four [repeated-measures correlation equals zero point zero seven, P equals two times ten to the negative one, which is among the four known Yamanaka factors for cellular dedifferentiation, showed a positive increase with age in several, but not all, human tissues. Nine other genes (e.g., HOXD ten, repeated-measures correlation equals zero point one six, P equals four times ten to the negative fifty; SRXN one, repeated-measures correlation equals negative zero point one four, P equals four times ten to the negative fifty-two from the RelativeAge+ module also had a nominally significant repeated-measures correlation P is less than zero point zero zero five in Genotype-Tissue Expression data, although opposite aging patterns could be found in select tissues. These observations highlight the relevance of genes in the RelativeAge+ module to stem cell biology and aging in human tissues.


## Interventional studies in mice

We related our methylation modules to interventions that are known to modulate the life span of mice. This included growth hormone receptor knockout (i.e., dwarf mice) and caloric restriction, which extended life, and a high-fat diet, which elicited the opposite effect. Six modules, including the purple module (RelativeAge+) showed a significant decrease P is less than zero point zero five of the module eigengene in dwarf mice and after caloric restriction and, conversely, a modest increase after a high-fat diet. Although the magenta, black, midnightblue, tan, and greenyellow modules have connections to the maximum life span in mammals, they did not present a clear relationship with interventions that modify murine life span. This suggests a mutual exclusivity between the modules related to the maximum mammalian life span and those affected by interventions modulating the murine life span.


## Transient expression of Yamanaka factors

We investigated whether a transient expression of the Yamanaka factors in the four-factor mouse affects the module eigengenes. The experimental design is shown in Figure four D, with additional details reported in the original article. Four of six of the above-mentioned murine intervention modules showed a nominally significant dose-dependent rejuvenation in murine skin (P is less than zero point zero six), and two modules showed the same in kidney (dose refers to the duration of four-F treatment: zero, one, seven, and ten months of intermittent expression of four-F factors) (Figure four E). The purple, ivory, and lavenderblush three modules were particularly sensitive to the four-F treatment (Pearson's r negative zero point six four in skin). In addition, the purple Relative Age plus module's response to the four-F treatment is consistent with bioinformatic findings that OCT four is an upstream regulator of this module. Among the life span modules, only the black module demonstrates an increase (P equals zero point zero zero seven) in skin of four-F treated mice, but this was not observed in the kidney.


## Epigenome-wide association analysis of maximum life span

We performed epigenome-wide association studies to identify individual CpGs with methylation levels that correlate with maximum life span. To reduce bias resulting from different levels of sequence conservation, our studies of maximum life span focused on three hundred thirty-three eutherian species, excluding marsupial and monotreme species. We restricted the analysis to twenty-eight thousand three hundred eighteen high-quality probes that are conserved between humans and mice.

When relating individual CpGs to log-transformed maximum life span, we used several modeling approaches (for details, see the supplementary text). Briefly, our first approach, generic modeling, applied regression analysis ignoring tissue type and age. In our second approach, we repeated the regression analysis after focusing on a given tissue type. Third, we focused on specific nonoverlapping age groups: young animals (defined as age less than one point five times the age at sexual maturity), middle-aged, and old (defined as age greater than three point five times the age at sexual maturity; figure S19). Some of these regression models were further adjusted for average species weight (denoted Lifespan Adj Weight).

For brevity, we will focus on linear regression models because phylogenetic regression models led to qualitatively similar conclusions (tables S13 and S14). The most significant life span-related CpGs are located in the distal in-neighboring TLE four (Pearson's r equals zero point six eight, P equals five point eight times ten to the negative forty-six; Figure five A and table S11) and HOXA four (r equals zero point six six, P equals seven point five times ten to the negative forty-five; Figure five A), module) and are negatively correlated with an intron of GATA three (r equals negative zero point six five, P equals eight point eight times ten to the negative forty-two); remained so after phylogenetic as the CpGs neighboring TLE four and HOXA four (P equals four point two times ten to the negative five and P equals four point eight times ten to the negative three, respectively; figure S17 and tables S11 and S12). The top one thousand life span-related CpGs (comprising five hundred positively and five hundred negatively life span-related CpGs) significantly overlapped (Fisher's exact P equals five point five times ten to the negative one thirty-four) with those found in our weight-adjusted analysis (Lifespan Adj Weight).

In general, methylation of life span-related CpGs does not change with age in mammalian tissues (Figure five B and figure S20). The same can be seen from studies of life span restricted to animals of a given age group (e.g., only very young animals; figure S20D). The studies of life span in all animals (irrespective of age) is highly correlated (r greater than zero point seven), with the analogous studies restricted to animals that are young, middle-aged, or old.

Studies of life span showed good consistency with the eigengene-based analysis in the mammalian comethylation network. As expected, the following previously discussed life span-related modules were enriched with CpGs implicated by our study of life span: midnightblue (hypergeometric test P equals two point two times ten to the negative forty-seven; 67/249 overlapped CpGs), greenyellow (hypergeometric

P equals two point one times ten to the negative thirty-six, P equals six point seven times ten to the negative twenty-three, P equals fifty times ten to the negative eighteen: 104/1542 overlapped CpGs). In total, one thousand six genes had a differential methylation association with life span (union of cognate genes resulting from the marginal model analysis for life span and Lifespan Adj Weight). The gene expression levels of sixteen of these genes exhibited a highly significant repeated-measures correlation with chronological age (rmCorr P value less than ten to the negative fifty) in different human tissues (Figure five C). The cognate genes next to the top five hundred positively life span-related CpGs play a


## Modules sensitive to lifespan-related interventions

critical role in animal organ morphogenesis marginal model life span GREAT enrichment false discovery rate FDR equals three times ten to the negative four and LifespanAdjWeight FDR equals three point three times ten to the negative seven Fig. five D and in increased rib number in mice FDR equals one times ten to the negative twenty-one Fig. five D, and implicates the HOXL subclass homeobox genes FDR equals zero point zero zero four and LifespanAdjWeight FDR equals one point three times ten to the negative fifteen in abnormal survival in mice

FDR is less than four times ten to the negative four. Upstream regulators of maximum life span We used ingenuity pathway analysis to identify potential upstream regulators of the genes cognate to the top five hundred positively and top five hundred negatively life span-related CpGs. The top-ranked candidate regulators of both gene lists included SOX2-OCT4-NANOG pluripotency factors FDR equals five point seven times ten to the negative four life span negative, FDR equals five point seven times ten to the negative four life span positive, which enrichment terms that are significant after adjustment for multiple comparisons hypergeometric FDR is less than zero point zero one and contain at least five significant genes. The top three significant terms per column EWAS and enrichment database are shown. E Ingenuity potential upstream regulator analysis of the differentially methylated genes related to mammalian maximum life span. Only significant FDR is less than zero point zero five regulators are represented in the bar plot. F Venn diagram of three gene lists. Gene list one is the top six hundred forty-six genes adjacent to one thousand life span-related CpGs five hundred positive and five hundred negative. Gene lists two and three are based on CpGs that are differentially methylated nominal Wald test P is less than zero point zero zero five, up to five hundred positive and five hundred negatively related CpGs after OSKM overexpression in murine kidney five hundred eighty-three genes and skin six hundred eighty-six genes. We observed significant overlap between the gene lists nominal. Fisher's exact P equals nine point nine times ten to the negative thirty for skin and life span; P equals forty-five times ten to the negative twenty-five for kidney and life span. G Transcriptional factor motif enrichment analysis of life span modules and life span-related CpGs. The enrichment results for LifespanAdjWeight negative were not significant. The overlap is assessed by a hypergeometric test for the CpGs within the motifs based on the human hg nineteen genome.

play critical roles in cellular reprogramming. We performed a control analysis that ruled out potential confounding by sequence conservation fig. S twenty-five. Upstream regulators also included several candidates related to development: sonic hedgehog SHH, life span-negative equals one point three times ten to the negative four POU4F2, life span-negative equals three point three times ten to the negative seven and ASCLI, life span-negative FDR equals one point six times ten to the negative three Fig. five E. These findings suggest that expression of life span-related genes might be regulated to some extent by pluripotency factors. This prompted us to investigate whether expression of any of the life span-related genes identified above are altered by transient expression of pluripotency inducing factors Yamanaka factors OSKM in a mouse model. Indeed, this analysis revealed that transient expression of OSKM altered the expression of one hundred ninety of six hundred forty-seven life span-related genes in skin and one hundred sixty-two life span-related genes in the kidney nominal Fisher's exact P equals nine point nine times ten to the negative thirty for skin and life span; P equals four point five times ten to the negative twenty-five for kidney and life span Fig. five F and fig. S thirty-two. Genomic positions that are known to be bound by pluripotency factors in at least one human or murine cell type according to chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing ChIP-seq data from the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements ENCODE consortium are located near CpGs that are associated with maximum species life spans: NANOG-binding sites are enriched for CpGs that are positively correlated with life span FDR equals zero point zero zero two and to CpGs underlying the midnightblue module FDR equals zero point zero zero zero six, which has high methylation levels in long-lived species Fig. five G. OCT4 POU5F1 FDR equals zero point zero two, and cMYC FDR equals zero point zero zero three binding sites are enriched with CpGs in the green-yellow module, which has low methylation levels in long-lived species Fig. five G. The ChIP-seq binding location analysis also implicates other noteworthy factors such as POLII, CTCF, RAD twenty-one, YY one, and TAF one, which show the strongest enrichment for negatively life span-related CpGs Fig. five G.

Given the role of CTCF in regulating the three-dimensional organization of the genome, we conducted an enrichment analysis of topologically associating domain boundaries and loop boundaries identified in both human and mouse cell lines. We found that both TAD and loop boundaries demonstrated significant enrichment of negatively life span-related C P Gs, false discovery rate equals three times ten to the negative four for TAD boundaries and false discovery rate equals six point seven times ten to the negative four for loop boundaries in various cell lines such as olfactory receptor cells and the human fibroblasts IMR ninety and HFFc six.


## CpGs linked to life span in various taxonomic orders and tissues

To pinpoint CpGs associated with logarithm maximum life span independently of phylogenetic order or tissue type, we conducted a meta-analysis of EWAS findings from twenty-five distinct strata comprising phylogenetic order and tissue type. Using a nonparametric meta-analysis approach rank P value, we assessed the EWAS of life span meta lifespan in these strata to identify CpGs unconfounded by tissue type or phylogenetic order. Our meta lifespan results demonstrated significant overlap with the previously mentioned EWASs of life span in all eutherian species hypergeometric P equals one times ten to the negative one hundred seventy-five. By contrast, none of the meta lifespan CpGs overlapped with EWASs of age, which further supports the idea that methylation of life span-related CpGs does not change with age in mammalian tissues. The top four CpGs from the meta lifespan analysis are depicted in figure six B, showing significant positive correlations for CpGs near LOXL1 and ZSCAN29 exons and negative correlations for those near RAB29 exon and GATA3 downstream, with logarithm maximum life span across various taxonomic orders and tissue types. Similar to our above-mentioned results, CpGs implicated by our meta lifespan analysis FDR less than zero point zero five overlap significantly FDR less than zero point zero one with genes involved in organ morphogenesis, RNA biosynthesis, increased rib number in mice, Wnt signaling, and genes altered by transient expression of pluripotency-inducing factors in mouse models nominal Fisher's exact P less than ten to the negative five for skin and meta lifespan; P less than ten to the negative eleven for kidney and meta lifespan.


## Chromatin state analysis

Our large-scale mammalian DNA methylation data confirm that CpGs located in promoter regions two thousand base pairs upstream to two thousand base pairs downstream of TSS have low methylation levels mean equals fifteen percent; contrast, those in gene bodies and distal regions are highly methylated mean equals approximately seventy percent. CpGs having a high or low mean methylation level tend to have positive or negative correlation test Z statistics for life span, respectively. We find that CpGs with low methylation levels in long-lived species are lo- binding P equals sixty-four times ten to the negative eleven; figure seven C P equals two times ten to the negative six. Lived species exhibit high or low methylation levels in chromosomal regions that are expected to have high or low methylation patterns, respectively, we used chromatin states that were identified and annotated based on greater than one thousand epigenetic datasets encompassing a diverse range of human cell and tissue types. The negatively life span-related CpGs are enriched with a constitutive TSS chromatin state TSS one, P equals two point five times ten to the negative twelve and promoter flanking P equals five point six times ten to the negative ten P equals five point six times ten to the negative ten equals two point zero times ten to the negative nine P equals three point zero times ten to the negative four; figure seven C. The CpGs with high methylation levels in blood samples of long-lived species are enriched in gene body-associated states notably transcribed and exon state TxEx one, P equals seven point five times ten to the negative eight and highly transcribed state TxEx four P equals one point seven times ten to the negative six figure seven D. A detailed description of the chromatin state enrichment for EWASs of maximum life span is provided in the supplementary text and tables S twenty-one and S twenty-two.

A biclustering analysis between chromatin annotations and comethylation modules based on fold enrichments figure eight and tables S twenty-one and S twenty-two revealed that the fifty-five mammalian comethylation modules fall into three large groupings referred to as meta-modules. The bar plot to the left of figure eight shows different mean methylation levels of the CpGs underlying the three meta-modules: mean methylation equals zero point two three, zero point six six, and zero point seven seven for meta-modules one, two, and three, respectively.

Meta-module one contains several chromatin states that are associated with Polycomb repression, including strong polycomb-repressed state ReprPC one and bivalent promoters BivProm one to two. Further, meta-module one contains chromatin states related to TSSs TSS one and TSS two and several flanking promoters Prom F two, Prom F three, Prom F four, and Prom F five. TSS one, Prom F four, and Prom F five associated with negatively life span-related CpGs were previously associated among universal chromatin states with the strongest enrichments for CpG islands seventy-one to one hundred one fold. The color band under figure eight reveals that six modules underlying meta-module one are sensitive to murine life span interventions. Meta-module one is enriched with CpGs that have low methylation levels in long-lived species overlap with EWASs of life span, tan and greenyellow mod-

Meta-module two can be considered as a partially methylated module (mean methylation zero point six six) and is enriched with several enhancer states, late replicating domains, partially methylated domains, commonPMD, and solo CpGs, WCGW. Meta-module two also contains the module most related with life span, midnight blue, and the human mortality risk module, magenta. These two modules overlap with the CpGs that are positively related to life span. Three out of four average weight-related modules are also located in meta-module two.


## Discussion

In this study, we present an analysis of a cross-species DNAm dataset obtained from a mammalian array platform. This platform specifically focuses on highly conserved regions of DNA, making it a valuable resource for studying methylation patterns across mammalian species. Successful construction of mammalian phyloepigenetic trees suggests that the divergence of DNAm profiles is closely aligned with genetic changes throughout evolution. Sensitivity assessments reveal that the observed phyloepigenetic associations are not caused by technical issues associated with our measurement platform. Instead, the phyloepigenetic signal may stem from sources such as upstream regulators, transcription factors, or DNA sequence variations in distant regions.

The conserved CpGs exhibiting the strongest phylogenetic signals are situated in intergenic regions, whereas promoter regions do not display such signals. Previous studies reported a rapid evolutionary rate of enhancers as a shared feature among mammalian genomes,

adjustment for phylogenetic relationships can be found in figs. S seventeen to S twenty, and corresponding enrichment results can be found in figs. S twenty-two to S twenty-four. Pearson correlation coefficients and P values are reported in different panels. Chromatin annotation enrichment analysis of the top five hundred negatively life span-related CpGs and the top five hundred positively life span-related CpGs. The columns in each panel correspond to EWAS results for log-transformed maximum life span across all tissues combined, Lifespan.All, blood samples only, Lifespan.Blood, and skin samples only, Lifespan.Skin, meta analysis of lifespan in different tissues, meta.lifespan, and the corresponding results after adjustment for average adult weight, LifespanAdjWeight. The last column reports enrichment with respect to the RelativeAge+ module, purple. We used the same significance thresholds as in Fig. five. Cell shading corresponds to fold enrichment between comethylation modules and each chromatin state. Numeric values correspond to the P value of such enrichments based on the from left forty-two. In addition, PRC one and PRC two binding sites are defined from the ChIP-seq data of PRC one and PRC two from ENCODE forty-five. The row and column hierarchical clustering trees (average linkage) are based on a dissimilarity measure one minus the pairwise Pearson correlation between log-transformed values. The left barplot indicates the mean methylation levels of the CpGs in each state for all eutherian samples in our data. We used the fourteen thousand seven hundred five eutherian CpGs as the background for enrichment of the comethylation modules. By contrast, twenty-eight thousand three hundred eighteen CpGs (high-quality as a background for enrichment of significant life span-related EWAS CpG groups with chromatin states and genome annotations. Each EWAS CpG group includes up to five hundred most significant CpGs per direction (positively or negatively related with life span), as detailed in the caption of Fig. five.

hypergeometrics test, and only cell values with significant P is less than zero point zero zero one are shown. The chromatin states are learned based on epigenetic datasets profiling chromatin mark signals in different human cell and tissue types, resulting in a genome annotation shared across cell types. The common partially methylated domains (commonPMD), solo CpGs (WCGW), and highly methylated domain (HMD) annotations are from forty-two. PRC one and PRC two binding sites are obtained from the ChIP-seq datasets of PRC one and PRC two from ENCODE forty-five.

but promoters demonstrate either full or partial conservation across species.

We found that thirty of the resulting fifty-five modules identified from an unsupervised machine learning method were readily associated with species traits (taxonomic order, maximum life span, and average adult weight) or individual traits (chronological age, tissue, and sex). We expect that many of the remaining twenty-five modules will be associated with biological characteristics about which we currently have no information. As a case in point, although the yellow module was not associated with any of our primary tested traits, it did show association with response to a murine circadian rhythm disruption study (light pollution during the night; fig. S7B). The upstream regulator analysis of the EWAS of life span identified the pluripotency transcription factors OCT4, SOX2, and NANOG. We showed that the transient overexpression of OSKM in murine tissues affects the methylation levels of CpGs near genes implicated by our EWAS of maximum life span (Fig. five E). We speculate that the enhanced activity of the pluripotency network in long-lived species results in more efficient tissue repair and maintenance, ensuring a longer life span.

Both the EWAS and eigengene-based analyses identified methylation signatures of maximum life span presumably established at birth. Most of these were independent of aging and interventions that affect murine mortality risk. Several CpGs that are more highly methylated in long-lived species are located near HOXL subclass homeoboxes and other genes that play a role in morphogenesis and development. Some of these life span-related CpGs are located next to genes that are also implicated in our analysis of upstream regulators (e.g., ASCL1 and SMAD6).

CpGs with methylation levels that are inversely related to life span are enriched in TSS one and promoter flanking (PromF four and PromF five)-associated chromatin states. Genes located in chromatin state TSS one are constitutively active and enriched for nucleic acid metabolic processes. This could imply that long-lived species either evolved selective mechanisms to maintain low methylation levels near TSSs or may have adaptations that promote the high expression of essential genes. This high expression may indirectly prompt more active DNA demethylation mechanisms.


## Methods summary

The Mammalian Methylation Consortium generated cytosine methylation data from N equals fifteen thousand four hundred fifty-six DNA samples derived from seventy tissue types of three hundred forty-eight mammalian species (three hundred thirty-one eutherians, fifteen marsupials, two monotremes) using a custom-designed mammalian methylation array that targets CpGs at conserved loci in mammals. DNAm data were used for phylo-epigenetic tree development using one-cor dissimilarity applied to mean methylation values per species. The choice of the correlation-based dissimilarity matrix is justified in the supplementary materials and methods.

For unsupervised analysis, we formed WGCNA networks based on two sets of CpG probes in our data. The first network was generated from fourteen thousand seven hundred five conserved CpGs in ten thousand nine hundred twenty-seven samples of one hundred sixty-seven eutherian species. The preservation of this network was evaluated in an independent dataset comprising three thousand six hundred ninety-two samples from twenty-nine tissues of two hundred twenty-eight mammalian species (one hundred sixty-four new species; sixty-four overlapped with the training set). The second network was a subset of seven thousand nine hundred fifty-six conserved CpGs in eleven thousand one hundred five samples from one hundred sixty-seven eutherian and nine marsupial species. In addition, we developed seven consensus comethylation networks to remove the confounding effects of species and tissue type. Consensus WGCNA can be interpreted as a meta-analysis across networks in different species and tissue types.

For the eutherian network (Net one), module eigengenes (MEs) were defined as singular vectors (corresponding to the highest singular value) from the singular value decomposition of the scaled CpGs that underlie the respective module. The eigengenes in the eutherian network (Net one) explained a range of twenty-four to sixty-three percent (average forty-three percent) of the variance in the methylation data in the training set, replication set, and all data in each module. For a given module, we defined the measure of module membership (kME) as the Pearson correlation between the module eigengene and the CpGs. The association of module eigengenes was examined for different traits using individual regression models.

EWAS of life span was done in twenty-eight thousand three hundred eighteen CpGs that apply to mice and humans according to calibration and titration data (correlation with calibration exceeds zero point eight) and mappability information as described in. Because the distribution of maximum life span and other life history traits were highly skewed, we imposed a log transformation on these phenotypes before conducting EWAS. Our tissue type-specific EWAS was conducted in tissues with enough species P greater than twenty-five available. For our various EWAS of log-transformed maximum life span, significance threshold eighteen times ten to the negative six based on the conservative Bonferroni adjustment. We report an FDR in our enrichment studies to adjust for multiple comparisons.


## DNA methylation networks underlying mammalian traits

Editor's summary

DNA methylation installs a methyl group to cytosine, placing an epigenetic mark that regulates gene expression. Comparative epigenomics combines epigenetic signatures with phylogenetic relationships to understand species characteristics. Haghani et al. evaluated methylation levels in highly conserved DNA sequences, profiling approximately fifteen thousand samples across three hundred forty-eight mammalian species. Phylogenetic trees suggest that the divergence of DNA methylation profiles closely mirrors genetic evolution. Species with longer maximum life spans have developed tidier methylation patterns within the genome, characterized by unique peaks and troughs of methylation. Methylation patterns associated with maximum life spans generally differ from those connected to age or interventions that affect mortality risk in mice. These data provide a rich resource of information for fields including evolutionary biology and longevity research. - Di Jiang