## Alternative K equals negative one loop quantum cosmology

An alternative quantization of the gravitational Hamiltonian constraint of the K equals negative one Friedmann-Robertson-Walker model is proposed by treating the Euclidean term and the Lorentzian term independently, mimicking the treatment of full loop quantum gravity. The resulting Hamiltonian constraint operator for the K equals negative one model with a massless scalar field is successfully constructed, and is shown to have the corrected classical limit. Compared to the former quantization schemes in the literature where only the Euclidean term is quantized, the new quantum dynamics of the K equals negative one model with a massless scalar field indicates that the classical big-bang singularity is replaced by an asymmetric quantum bounce.


## One. INTRODUCTION

How to quantize general relativity in a consistent manner is a great challenge to theoretical physics. One of the promising candidates is the so-called loop quantum gravity which is a nonperturbative approach to quantum general relativity. In the past three decades, loop quantum gravity has made remarkable progress, such as making the natural predictions of the discretized geometries and providing the microscopic interpretation of black hole entropy. The nonperturbative quantization procedure of loop quantum gravity has been successfully applied to the metric F of R theories, scalar-tensor theories, higher-dimensional gravity, and so on. Despite these achievements, the dynamics of full loop quantum gravity is still an unsolved issue. To gain a certain level of understanding of the dynamics, the quantization ideas and technologies developed in loop quantum gravity have also been applied to its symmetry-reduced models, such as the Friedmann-Robertson-Walker models and the spherically symmetric black hole models, leading to loop quantum cosmology and loop quantum black hole models. The most successful feature of loop quantum cosmology is that it can resolve the classical big bang singularity by a quantum bounce due to the quantum geometry effects. We refer to more complete reviews on loop quantum cosmology.

In full loop quantum gravity, the gravitational Hamiltonian constraint is a combination of the so-called Euclidean term and the Lorentzian term. In the spatially flat, K equals zero Friedmann-Robertson-Walker model, the Lorentzian term and the Euclidean term are proportional to each other. Thus one often combines these two terms into one term proportional to the Euclidean term, and then quantizes the Euclidean term to obtain the well-defined gravitational Hamiltonian constraint operator. It turns out that in this quantization scheme the classical big-bang singularity is replaced by a symmetric quantum bounce for the K equals zero Friedmann-Robertson-Walker model with a massless scalar field in the framework of loop quantum cosmology. Note that in full loop quantum gravity, the Lorentzian term is quantized independently by employing the Thiemann's trick. Thus,

to mimic the full loop quantum gravity quantization procedure in the K equals zero model of loop quantum cosmology, the Euclidean term and the Lorentzian term were treated independently. This alternative quantization scheme leads to an asymmetric quantum bounce, which relates the spatially flat Friedmann-Robertson-Walker model with an asymptotic de Sitter universe, and thus an effective cosmological constant and an effective Newtonian constant can be obtained.

As in the K equals zero model, the quantization technologies for the gravitational Hamiltonian constraint developed in loop quantum gravity have been extended to the K equals negative one and positive one models. Compared to the K equals zero model where the spin connection vanishes and hence the Ashtekar connection equals the extrinsic curvature multiplied by the Immirzi parameter, the Lorentzian term is not proportional to the total Euclidean term, but is proportional to the part of the Euclidean term involving the extrinsic curvature due to the nonvanishing spin connection for both the K equals negative one model and the K equals positive one model. Hence in the literature one often absorbs the Lorentzian term into a part of the Euclidean term, and then quantize the two parts of the Euclidean term, respectively. It turns out that, as in the K equals zero model with the similar treatment, the resulting K equals negative one loop quantum cosmology model also predicts a vacuum repulsion in the high curvature regime that would lead to a symmetric bounce. Moreover, the K equals negative one model of loop quantum cosmology also possesses some new features that never appear in the K equals zero model, for example, due to a vacuum repulsion in the high curvature regime, the scale factor has the minimum value as A min equals YV A. It is natural to ask whether the treatment of the Lorentzian term independently, mimicking the treatment in the full theory, can be directly carried to the K equals negative one model, and whether an asymmetric bounce can still be held for the K equals negative one model. This is the main motivation of the present paper. In this paper, we consider an alternative quantization of the gravitational Hamiltonian constraint in the K equals negative one model by treating the Lorentzian term independently.

This paper is organized as follows. The canonical formulation of the K equals negative one model is briefly recalled in Section two. Then we propose an alternative gravitational Hamiltonian constraint operator by treating the Lorentzian term independently, and provide a new quantum dynamics for the K equals negative one model in Section three. The effective theory of the new quantum dynamics and its asymptotic behavior are studied in Section four. Summary is included in the last section.


## Two. CANONICAL FORMULATION OF THE K equals negative one MODEL

According to the cosmological principle, the line elements of the homogenous isotropic cosmological models take as

D s squared equals negative D t squared plus A squared of T multiplied by one over one minus K R squared D R squared plus R squared multiplied by D theta squared plus sine squared theta D phi squared where A of T is the scale factor, and K equals negative one, zero, or one for the open, flat, and closed Friedmann-Robertson-Walker models, respectively.

In what follows, we present the canonical formulation of the K equals negative one model following reference. For the spatially non-compact K equals zero, negative one models with topology homeomorphic to R cubed, one introduces an "elemental cell" V on the homogeneous spatial manifold R cubed and restrict all integrals to this elemental cell. Then one chooses a fiducial metric Q underscore A B equals omega underscore A superscript I omega underscore B superscript J delta underscore I J on R cubed with omega underscore A superscript I being the left- and right-invariant fiducial one-forms in the K equals zero model, and only the left-invariant fiducial one-forms in the K equals negative one model. Here A, B, and so on denote the spatial indices while I, J, and so on equal one, two, three. Denote V underscore A the volume of V measured by the fiducial metric Q underscore A B. The left-invariant one-forms omega underscore A superscript I satisfy the Maurer-Cartan equation

DQ omega superscript I plus one half C superscript I underscore J K omega superscript J omega superscript K equals zero, two point two where for the K equals negative one model the structure constants read

C underscore J K superscript I equals delta underscore J superscript I delta underscore K one minus delta underscore K superscript I delta underscore J one, two point three while for the K equals zero model they take zero. The corresponding left-invariant vector fields E underscore I superscript A are dual to omega underscore A superscript I, satisfying E underscore I superscript A omega underscore A superscript J equals delta underscore I superscript J, and E underscore I superscript A omega underscore B superscript I equals delta underscore B superscript A. The commutators between the left-invariant vector fields read

Left bracket E underscore I, E underscore J right bracket equals C superscript K underscore I J E underscore K, two point four

Classically, the dynamical variables of L Q C are obtained by symmetrically reducing those of full L Q G. In the full theory, the dynamical variables consist of the S U two-valued connection A underscore A superscript I and the densitized triad E underscore J superscript B with the nontrivial Poisson bracket

Left curly bracket A underscore A superscript I left parenthesis X right parenthesis, E underscore J superscript B left parenthesis Y right parenthesis right curly bracket equals Kappa gamma delta underscore A superscript B delta underscore J superscript I delta left parenthesis X, Y right parenthesis, two point five where Kappa equals eight pi G with G being the Newtonian constant, and gamma is the Immirzi parameter. The connection A underscore A superscript I is related to the spin connection Gamma underscore A superscript I and the extrinsic curvature K underscore A superscript I by A underscore A superscript I equals Gamma underscore A superscript I plus gamma K underscore A superscript I. It turns out that the symmetry-reduced extrinsic curvature K underscore A superscript I is diagonal in the basis of left-invariant one-forms for the K equals zero, negative one models. While, unlike the K equals zero model where Gamma underscore A superscript I vanishes, the symmetry-reduced spin connection Gamma underscore A superscript I in the K equals negative one model takes the form

Gamma underscore A superscript I equals negative epsilon superscript one I J omega underscore A superscript J, two point six and thus it is nondiagonal. Hence the symmetry-reduced connection and densitized triad for the K equals negative one model read

A underscore A superscript I equals negative epsilon superscript one I J omega underscore A superscript J plus C V subscript o superscript negative one third omega underscore A superscript I equivalent to A underscore J superscript I V subscript o superscript negative one third omega underscore A superscript J, two point seven

E tilde sub i super a equals p V sub o super negative two thirds square root of determinant left parenthesis super o q right parenthesis super o e sub i super a,

where

A sub j super i equals left parenthesis begin array c and zero and zero backslash zero and c and negative V sub o super one third backslash zero and V sub o super one third and c end array right parenthesis,

the variables c and p are only functions of t, and determinant left parenthesis super o q right parenthesis denotes the determinant of super o q sub a b. Hence the gravitational phase space of the k equals negative one model consists of conjugate pairs left parenthesis c, p right parenthesis. The nontrivial Poisson bracket reads left curly bracket c, p right curly bracket equals fraction kappa divided by three gamma.

Note that the variables c and p are related to the scale factor a by absolute value of p equals a squared V sub o super two thirds and c equals gamma a dot V sub o super one third. The physical volume V of the elemental cell calligraphic V measured by the spatial (physical) metric q sub a b equals absolute value of p V sub o super negative two thirds super o q sub a b is related to p via V equals absolute value of p to the power of three halves. In the improved scheme, it is convenient to choose the following variables to simplify the dynamics b colon equals fraction bar mu times c divided by two, v colon equals fraction s g n left parenthesis p right parenthesis absolute value of p to the power of three halves divided by two pi gamma ell sub p squared square root of Delta,

ell sub p is equivalent to square root of G h bar denotes the Planck length, s g n left parenthesis p right parenthesis is the sig where nature of p, Delta is equivalent to four square root of three pi gamma ell sub p squared is the minimum nonzero eigenvalue of the area operator in full LQG, and bar mu is equivalent to square root of Delta divided by absolute value of p. The Poisson bracket between b and v is given by left curly bracket b, v right curly bracket equals fraction one divided by h bar.

As in the k equals zero model, the Gauss and diffeomorphism constraints of the gravitational part are automatically satisfied for the symmetry-reduced variables in equations two point seven and two point eight in the k equals negative one model, and thus the classical dynamics is encoded in the Hamiltonian constraint. The gravitational Hamiltonian constraint of the k equals negative one model reads