## Biology, fisheries, assessment and management of Pacific hake (Merluccius productus)

Chapter Nine Biology, fisheries, assessment and management of Pacific hake (Merluccius productus)


## Nine point one Introduction

Pacific hake (Merluccius productus) is the most productive and economically important commercial fish species off the west coast of North America, south of Alaska. The largely mid-water and domestic fisheries catch upwards of two hundred thousand tonnes each year and are managed jointly by the United States and Canada. Pacific hake migrate along the coast each year, typically spawning near the southern end of their range in the winter. Their movement, growth and reproductive success are all heavily dependent on environmental conditions along the coast. Pacific hake are an important part of the California Current Large Marine Ecosystem along with being a key target for North American west coast fisheries.


## Nine point two Stocks

Three or more biologically and genetically distinct stocks of Pacific hake occur along the west coast of North America. These stocks include the large coastal stock and smaller, spatially restricted inshore stocks, one within Puget Sound and another in the Strait of Georgia. A 'dwarf' Pacific hake stock had previously been recognised off Baja California but is now considered a separate species. Here, we focus on the large coastal stock of Pacific hake, which is the most abundant groundfish population in the California Current Large Marine Ecosystem. The majority of this population migrates annually from offshore of southern California and Mexico at approximately latitude thirty to thirty-five degrees north during the winter spawning season to coastal areas as far north as Haida Gwaii, formerly the Queen Charlotte Islands, at latitude fifty-three degrees north or, in some years, southeast Alaska approximately fifty-eight degrees north, during the spring, summer and fall. Although there is thought to be little overlap in time and space among hake stocks, recent research supports the hypothesis that hake from the separately managed inshore stocks overlap with the large coastal stock, particularly in the summer. Gao et al. found evidence of two stocks of hake off the Washington coast based on isotopic signatures in the core of otoliths. This finding is consistent with Puget Sound or Strait of Georgia stocks being found throughout the Strait of Juan de Fuca and near the northern-western tip of Washington. In addition, King et al. reported genetic evidence, supported by differences in biological parameters and parasite infection levels, of three separate stocks of resident Pacific hake in Canadian waters. They also found that there was likely mixing of inshore resident stocks and the coastal stock during the summer, especially in Queen Charlotte Sound where the Canadian fishery operates to varying degrees each summer. On the basis of these two studies, mixing of inshore resident and migratory coastal stocks occurs in some, if not all years, resulting in some harvest of resident Pacific hake by the fishery targeting the coastal stock. The exploitation level of inshore stocks is likely dependent on the relative population sizes of coastal and inshore stocks and their spatial distributions in any year.


## Nine point three Biology, life history and ecology

Nine point three point one Environment

Pacific hake reside primarily within the California Current Large Marine Ecosystem. Climate and ocean conditions affect the distribution and abundance of coastal Pacific hake throughout its life history. The California Current exhibits spatially complex and temporally varied flow dynamics. During the spring and summer, northerly wind stress drives coastal upwelling and southward surface flow, while in fall and winter, southerly wind stress leads to downwelling and northward surface flow. Along Vancouver Island, the large volumes of freshwater discharged from coastal rivers onto the continental shelf result in northward surface flow in the summer as well. The California Undercurrent, a subsurface northward flow, exists year-round on the continental shelf and upper slope, at a varying proximity to the shelf break. The Undercurrent is nearly contiguous from latitude thirty-three degrees to fifty-one degrees north, with a relatively narrow core of ten to twenty kilometers at depths of two hundred to three hundred meters where mean sustained velocities of ten to twenty centimeters per second have been recorded. Upwelling brings cool, dense and nutrient-rich waters to or near to the surface along the coast, increases the productivity of the California Current Large Marine Ecosystem and contributes to favourable feeding areas for Pacific hake during the summer months.

Climate forcing at inter-decadal, for example regime shifts, and inter-annual time scales, for example El Niño or La Niña events, affects the distribution and productivity of marine species within the California Current Large Marine Ecosystem. Regime shifts, detected from coincidental changes in the distribution, survival, and abundance of many marine plankton and fish species, occurred in nineteen twenty-five, nineteen forty-seven, nineteen seventy-seven, nineteen eighty-nine and nineteen ninety-eight. These shifts represent relatively abrupt, widespread and persistent changes in productivity, with effects cascading through all trophic levels. Within these regimes, ocean conditions are affected by El Niño events, resulting in warming of coastal waters offshore of the shelf-break and stronger poleward flow in the California Current Large Marine Ecosystem, and La Niña events, that couple cooling of surface temperatures with reduced poleward flow. A warming trend detected in all global oceans accounts for a one-degree Celsius increase in average annual water temperature in the California Current Large Marine Ecosystem over the past fifty years. This warming is likely to have widespread consequences for the California Current Large Marine Ecosystem, including the patterns in spawning, recruitment, abundance and distribution of the coastal Pacific hake stock that we describe in this chapter. King et al. concluded that warmer years would likely reduce recruitment success for Pacific hake and or result in a northward shift in spawning and rearing areas. However, increased upwelling could increase euphausiid density at the continental shelf break resulting in increased growth of Pacific hake, while warmer conditions would likely result in farther average northward migration and development of resident stocks farther north as well.


## Nine point three point two Embryos and larvae

Spawning is hypothesized to occur in dense aggregations several hundred kilometers offshore of southern and Baja California in January through March, at depths of one hundred to five hundred meters, but spawning aggregations have seldom been directly observed. Occasional reports of successful spawning north of this region have been made over the years consistent with the expected shift associated with warming of the CCLME. Fertilized embryos and larvae remain beneath the mixed layer, and as larvae grow, they move inshore to the continental shelf and slope.

The survival of larval Pacific hake is strongly influenced by environmental conditions such as upwelling, advection, and water temperature experienced during the first few months after spawning. Cold ocean years typically produce weak year classes, while more variation in year class strength occurs among warm ocean years. Cold ocean years along the west coast also have stronger upwelling, equatorward transport after the spring transition, and offshore advection. Depressed Pacific hake recruitment in cooler years may be due to advection of embryos and larvae to unfavorable habitat or the presence of different dominant zooplankton prey and/or predator species. Warm years with weak upwelling and offshore advection early in the year might allow larvae to quickly reach favorable coastal habitat and take advantage of upwelling-driven biological production later in the year.

1985; Bailey et al., 1986; Hollowed, 1992; Agostini, 2005). Cold ocean years typically produce weak year classes, while more variation in year class strength occurs among warm ocean years. Cold ocean years along the west coast also have stronger upwelling, equatorward transport after the spring transition and offshore advection (the opposite conditions prevail in warm years). Depressed Pacific hake recruitment in cooler years may be due to advection of embryos and larvae to un-favourable habitat or the presence of different dominant zooplankton prey and/or predator species (Bailey, 1981; Hollowed, 1992; Agostini, 2005). Warm years with weak upwelling and offshore advection early in the year might allow larvae to quickly reach favourable coastal habitat and take advantage of upwelling-driven biological production later in the year (Hollowed and Bailey, 1989).


## Nine point three point three Juveniles and adults

Nine point three point three point one North-south distribution

The north-south distribution of the migrating coastal stock ranges on average from about twenty-five to fifty-five degrees North, with adults from southern and offshore spawning areas feeding off Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia from April/May through September/October. Age structure, size distribution, and environmental conditions are all important factors in determining the spatial distribution and annual coast-wide migration of the Pacific hake stock and its availability to both monitoring surveys and commercial fishing operations. Usually, the oldest, largest fish travel the greatest distances north into Canadian waters, likely because they can sustain higher swimming speeds. A greater fraction of these fish also tends to be females, which, beyond the age of three years are on average larger than males. During warm years, Pacific hake migrate farther northward than in cool years due to an intensified northward California undercurrent, weaker upwelling, and equatorward surface flow and changes in prey distribution.

The northward feeding migration begins during the winter and early spring, when poleward transport dominates. These conditions favor the northward movement of Pacific hake. When equatorward transport in surface waters and upwelling conditions in the springtime are strong, the northward movement of Pacific hake is impeded because the fish must swim against strong southward currents, they may avoid cold upwelled waters, or they may find favorable feeding areas farther south after upwelling has improved productivity. The role of ocean conditions in the timing of the southward migration in the fall is less known. Thomson et al. noted that Pacific hake typically disappear from the La Perouse Bank area around the time of the fall transition and linked this disappearance to marked declines in prey production. Saunders and McFarlane suggested that factors influencing southward migration might be similar to those influencing northern migration, i.e., age-dependent swimming speed and favorable current patterns.

Changes in adult Pacific hake migration may affect where spawning occurs and how well the embryos, larvae, and juveniles of succeeding year classes grow and survive. Ressler et al. reviewed evidence of a more northerly distribution of both spawning and summertime feeding aggregations, including a more northerly distribution of adult hake in summer surveys, year-round presence of adult hake in southeast Alaska, and the presence of hake larvae and juveniles off Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia in summer during some recent years.


## Nine point three point three point two Cross-shelf distribution

Pacific hake form dense daytime aggregations on the continental shelf break and near the edges of mid-shelf banks and basins, sometimes extending forty kilometers or more offshore over water depths as great as two thousand meters. Pacific hake are found primarily between depths of fifty and five hundred meters during the day, most commonly in aggregations at depths of between one hundred fifty and two hundred fifty meters.

From south to north in the CCLME, Pacific hake aggregations increase in depth and move further offshore along the continental shelf to the shelf break. This pattern probably reflects ontogenetic effects on depth preferences, that is, smaller, younger juvenile fish do not migrate as far north as older Pacific hake, and juvenile Pacific hake exhibit a greater preference for shallower shelf locations than mature fish. At least in some years, hake have been shown to be preferentially aggregated off the shelf break at the depth of the sub-surface poleward-flow of the California Undercurrent.

Temperature gradients may be an important mechanism driving Pacific hake depth distribution, but preferred temperature ranges for Pacific hake have not been established. The distribution of Pacific hake across years demonstrates that they are able to live within a range of temperatures. Temperature and depth are correlated with other factors, including currents and prey availability. Swartzman suggests that euphausiids sense and orient to oceanographic factors and Pacific hake sense and orient to euphausiids.


## Biology, fisheries, assessment and management of Pacific hake

Nine point three point three point three Diel migrations

Adult Pacific hake form pelagic schools during the day, mostly between the depths of fifty and five hundred meters, then disperse and migrate towards the surface at dusk; during spawning, they neither feed nor migrate vertically. The vertical migration is usually thought to facilitate predation upon fish and zooplankton in the water column and may be influenced by several factors, as observed in other marine fishes.


## Nine point three point four Prey and predation

Pacific hake is both an important food source for many predators and likely the most important consumer of zooplankton and forage fish in the CCLME. Larvae and smaller juvenile hake feed on copepod eggs, copepods and juvenile euphausiids. The diet of large juveniles and adults is composed primarily of euphausiids, fish and pandalid shrimp, with evidence of adult cannibalism on juveniles. The amount of spatial overlap and cannibalism between adult and juvenile fish varies annually in response to environmental and demographic factors as discussed previously. Larger zooplankton and fish become more important dietary components as Pacific hake grow. Pacific hake are usually considered to be opportunistic feeders, particularly upon schooling or aggregating prey. The daily ration for juvenile and adult Pacific hake has been estimated variously between zero point four percent and three point five percent of body weight. Euphausiids nearly always appear as a very important component of the Pacific hake diet, but some studies have demonstrated seasonal and inter-annual changes in the mix of prey types utilized throughout the CCLME. These shifts include from primarily euphausiid prey (primarily Thysanoessa spinifera) to increased consumption of Pacific herring in late summer off Vancouver Island and during the nineteen ninety-seven to nineteen ninety-eight El Niño, and from mostly fish prey to euphausiids in the summertime off Oregon and Washington.

Pacific hake are also important prey for other species. Pacific hake embryos and larvae are preyed upon by copepods, amphipods and gelatinous zooplankton. Pacific hake juveniles and adults are also prey for other nekton, including dogfish, sablefish, lingcod,


## Hakes

arrowtooth flounder, rockfishes and tunas, as well as apex predators such as California sea lions, Steller sea lions, harbor seals, sperm whales and other toothed whales, sooty shearwaters, western gulls and common murres. The predation of Humboldt squid upon adult Pacific hake has recently received attention, as these squid have become periodically more common in the northern CCLME. In particular, the northward expansion of Humboldt squid in two thousand nine resulted in considerable overlap in depth and geographic range with Pacific hake. This hake forms an important link between upper and lower trophic levels in the CCLME.


## Nine point three point five Population dynamics

Pacific hake live more than twenty years, attaining lengths of over fifty centimeters of total length, with fifty percent reaching maturity by the age of four years, at about thirty-seven centimeters. Dorn et al. estimated a natural mortality rate of zero point two three per year. Hamel and Stewart used a meta-analytical approach incorporating multiple life-history correlates to develop a log-normal prior for M with mean zero point one nine three per year.

Recruitment dynamics in the coastal stock of Pacific hake are characterised by episodic strong year classes, which can vary in number by as much as two orders of magnitude or more relative to weak year classes. The occurrence of these dominant year classes appears to be largely independent of spawning stock size, so a reliable stock-recruitment relationship has been difficult to establish. Varying levels of mortality during the pre-recruit period is a common explanation for similar recruitment dynamics in other species.

Hollowed et al. found that Pacific hake appeared to respond more strongly to inter-annual variability than to decadal climatic variability. Strong year classes often occurred in years with unusually warm surface temperature anomalies in coastal waters north of the tropics, 'Niño North' conditions that do not always correspond to El Niño events. The frequency of these conditions will affect the size and variability of the coastal Pacific hake stock.

Individual growth of Pacific hake can also be quite variable. Helser et al. examined length-at-age data from the acoustic and bottom trawl surveys and found that both of the van Bertalanffy growth parameters K, Brody growth coefficient, and L, asymptotic size, declined for individual cohorts from the early nineteen seventies and the mid-nineteen eighties and subsequently increased again. Temporary decreases in parameter estimates could be due to warmer waters and reduced productivity following the nineteen seventy-seven regime shift,


## Biology, fisheries, assessment and management of Pacific hake

increased competition due to strong year classes, or both. Individual growth was depressed during the nineteen eighty-three to nineteen eighty-four El Niño, perhaps due to reduced euphausiid abundance.


## Nine point four Fisheries

The fishery for the coastal population of Pacific hake occurs along the coasts of California, Oregon and Washington in the United States and British Columbia in Canada, typically from May through December. The primary fishery is conducted with mid-water trawls over bottom depths of one hundred to five hundred meters; Pacific hake are also caught incidentally in other coastal fisheries. Catch averaged two hundred twenty-two thousand tons per year during nineteen sixty-six to twenty twelve, with nearly three-quarters of that catch coming from the U.S. waters. Recent coast-wide catches have been greater than the long-term average, averaging two hundred forty-three thousand tons per year during two thousand eight to two thousand twelve.

Pacific hake were caught incidentally in commercial fisheries targeting more valuable species dating from the late nineteenth century but were discarded or processed into animal food and fishmeal until the nineteen sixties. Annual landings never exceeded a few hundred tons during this period. In nineteen sixty-four, the U.S. National Marine Fisheries Service demonstrated the potential for large catches of Pacific hake, up to thirty tons in a single half-hour trawl, off Washington and Oregon using state-of-the-art depth telemetry systems on mid-water trawlers. The domestic fishery in the United States grew from less than five hundred tons in nineteen sixty-four to about nine thousand tons in nineteen sixty-seven, although these levels were not sustained afterwards due to lack of profitability.

Foreign fleets noticed the increased harvest opportunity, and in nineteen sixty-six, factory trawlers from the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics began harvesting


## Hakes

Pacific hake. Japanese vessels, whose primary target was Pacific Ocean perch, Sebastes alutus, also harvested Pacific hake in the late nineteen sixties. Vessels from Poland, the Federal Republic of Germany, the German Democratic Republic and Bulgaria joined the fishery for Pacific hake in the nineteen seventies. Foreign annual catch of Pacific hake from nineteen sixty-six through nineteen seventy-nine averaged one hundred sixty-seven thousand tons.

Joint venture fisheries commenced in nineteen seventy-eight and completely supplanted the foreign fishery by nineteen eighty-nine in the United States and nineteen ninety-two in Canada. The entry of domestic motherships and catcher-processors into the U.S. Pacific hake fishery in nineteen ninety accelerated the change to a wholly domestic U.S. fishery that took the entire catch by nineteen ninety-one. The domestic Pacific hake fishery in Canada developed at a slower pace in the absence of these larger domestic processing vessels and remains largely a domestic shoreside fishery, with a small joint venture fishery in most years.


## Nine point four point one Management strategy and challenges

Since implementation of the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act in the United States and the declaration of a two hundred-mile fishery conservation zone in Canada in the late nineteen seventies, annual harvest quotas have been the primary management tool used to limit the catch of Pacific hake. Scientists from both countries collaborated through the Technical Subcommittee of the Canada-U.S. Groundfish Committee, and there were informal agreements on the adoption of annual fishing policies. During the nineteen nineties, however, disagreements between the United States and Canada on the allotment of the catch between the U.S. and Canadian fisheries led to quota overruns. This, coupled with the decline of abundant year classes from


## Biology, fisheries, assessment and management of Pacific hake

the mid-1980s, led to Pacific hake being declared overfished below twenty-five percent of average unfished spawning biomass in the United States in two thousand and two. The strong nineteen ninety-nine year class was subsequently observed in the acoustic survey and fisheries, and a new assessment and abundance estimate led to the stock being declared rebuilt in two thousand and four.

The allocation issue was resolved with the development and eventual implementation of the Agreement between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of Canada on Pacific Hake/Whiting, the Treaty, which was signed in November two thousand three. The Treaty specifies a process for developing annual stock assessments and total allowable catch including a default harvest rate of F forty percent and fixed allocations of seventy-three point eight-eight percent and twenty-six point one-two percent for the United States and Canada, respectively. The Hake Treaty established a Joint Management Commission, JMC, that decides the annual TAC. JMC decisions are guided by the terms of the Treaty and the JMC's three advisory bodies consisting of the Joint Technical Committee, JTC, the Scientific Review Group, SRG, and an Advisory Panel. The JTC conducts the annual stock assessment and develops potential yield amounts for JMC consideration. The SRG assures the technical integrity of the stock assessment and the assessment's potential yield estimates. The Advisory Panel is composed of hake industry participants from the United States and Canada, who provide their perspectives about the fishery.

Management of the coastal Pacific hake fishery is shared among the JMC, who recommends the annual TAC, the U.S. NMFS NOAA Fisheries and the Canadian Department of Fisheries and Oceans, DFO, which are responsible for domestic management of their countries fisheries. In the United States, NOAA Fisheries receive advice from the Pacific Fishery Management Council, PFMC, which recommends specific management and enforcement measures. Canada gives priority to domestic fisheries in allocating yield between domestic and joint venture fisheries.

An Individual Vessel Quota system was implemented for the British Columbia trawl fleet in nineteen ninety-seven, with allocation based on a combination of vessel size and landings history. Although vessels may deliver joint venture hake quota to domestic shoreside processors, they are not permitted to deliver domestic allocation to joint venture/processor operations at sea. There is no direct allocation of quota to individual shoreside processors. IVQ holders declare the proportion of their hake quota that will be landed in the domestic market, and shoreside processors must secure catch from vessel license holders.

In the United States, yield is allocated among coastal tribes and the three domestic sectors. Washington coastal tribes have a treaty right to request amounts of fish to conduct fisheries within their respective usual and accustomed fishing areas. The Makah tribe has been full participants in the hake fishery since nineteen ninety-six. Beginning in two thousand nine, the Quileute tribe has been requested and allocated an amount but has yet to harvest any hake. The Quinault tribe has also expressed interest in the hake fishery.

A formal allocation structure for the U.S. non-tribal fishery sectors was developed by the PFMC and implemented by NOAA Fisheries in nineteen ninety-seven. Each year, the non-tribal allocation is divided among the shore-based trawl sector, forty-two percent, the mothership sector, twenty-four percent, and the catcher-processor sector, thirty-four percent. This action stabilised the fishery and resolved a highly contentious allocation battle and alleviated the race to fish. The allocation provides each group with a relative amount of stability in business planning by reducing the excessive competitive pressures associated with an open-access, derby style fishery: it slowed the pace of the fishery and opened opportunities for the fishery to act more rationally, improve product quality and expand product forms.

Shortly after the nineteen ninety-seven allocation agreement, the companies licensed to operate in the at-sea catcher-processor sector of the U.S. Pacific hake fishery formed the Pacific Whiting Conservation Cooperative, PWCC, to promote rational harvest, optimal utilisation and minimal waste in the fishery. The PWCC fishing cooperative ended the race-for-fish in the catcher-processor sector fourteen years before the comprehensive rationalisation of the U.S. Pacific hake fishery. Their efforts resulted in decreased bycatch and waste, improved product quality and reduced fishing effort. The PWCC also sponsors scientific research, including stock assessment-related projects and bycatch avoidance programs. The cooperative model developed by the PWCC was later adopted in other fisheries, such as the walleye pollock fishery off Alaska.

Management of the U.S. fishery transitioned in two thousand eleven to a fully rationalised fishery, with an individual quota share program for the shoreside fishery and formal cooperatives for the mothership sector in addition to those for the catcher-processor sector. Bycatch of other groundfish species is strictly managed under the quota share system in the shoreside hake fishery, while sector-specific overfished rockfish species catch limits are used to ensure their minimal bycatch in the mothership and catcher-processor fisheries. Endangered Species Act listed salmonid impacts are managed under the aegis of a NOAA Fisheries Biological Opinion, for which specific measures include closed areas, seasonal fishery structure and overall limits on Chinook salmon bycatch.

Mid-water trawl nets are required in the U.S. hake fishery. These are four-seam nets designed to catch schooling fish such as walleye pollock and Pacific hake, whose schools tend to behave in unison. Bycatch of non-hake species in the Pacific hake fishery is generally quite low, as Pacific hake tend to aggregate in large acoustically recognisable schools in the pelagic zone and mid-water trawl gear is fished off the bottom minimising interactions with non-hake species. Nonetheless, bycatch of limiting rockfish species has occasionally been an issue. The U.S. non-tribal hake fishery sectors are held to hard bycatch limits that, if exceeded, can result in closure of non-tribal fisheries, to limit impacts on certain depleted rockfish species. Prior to two thousand nine, the rockfish bycatch limits were not sector specific; that is, high bycatch in one sector could close the fishery for all the non-tribal sectors. In both two thousand seven and two thousand eight, there were mid-season closures due to bycatch of limiting species, but the


## Biology, fisheries, assessment and management of Pacific hake

fishery was reopened later in the year once bycatch quota was reallocated from other fisheries. Despite these closures, about ninety percent of the U.S. hake TAC was achieved in both those years, similar to other recent years without closures. The bycatch limits were applied at the specific sector level beginning in two thousand nine, minimising the potential for one sector to affect the other sectors. Under the trawl rationalisation program, bycatch in the shoreside hake fishery is now managed using a quota share system.

The three U.S. non-tribal sectors track tow-by-tow catch and bycatch amounts using real-time catch information collected by fishery observers. When the rare high bycatch tow occurs, that information is shared with the rest of the fleet so that other vessels can avoid fishing in the area of high bycatch. The U.S. hake industry also works in partnership with NOAA Fisheries in testing newly developed bycatch reduction devices specifically designed for the hake fishery. Lomeli and Wakefield two thousand twelve tested two open escape window BRD designs, with the goal of providing a tool to reduce the bycatch of Chinook salmon and rockfish in the hake fishery. The most successful design reduced bycatch by about eighty percent for Chinook salmon and twenty percent for widow rockfish.

The coastal Pacific hake stock is characterised by low recruitment punctuated by very strong year classes, leading to highly variable estimates of catch at maximum sustainable yield. The fishery is managed to sustain the stock through these fluctuations in recruitment. The forty-ten percent rule, which decreases allowable catch from the maximum sustainable yield rule when the spawning stock is below forty percent of modeled average unfished biomass, providing a precautionary mechanism to curtail harvest when the stock is low, had been used in the Pacific Fishery Management Council process for many years before being written into the Treaty. The Joint Management Committee determines total allowable catch by considering current stock status, uncertainties in the data and model projections and the potential effect on future stock status, while limited by the F forty percent default harvest rate and the forty-ten percent rule. The coast-wide fishery, on average, has attained eighty-five percent of the total allowable catch in the most recent years, mostly due to unused tribal allocation and bycatch restrictions.

A final challenge to the management of Pacific hake is the potential overlap of the coastal stock and its fishery with other smaller stocks. An overlap is unlikely to be a major risk biologically for the large coastal stock but could be biologically risky to the other, smaller stocks, depending on the fishing mortality experienced by those stocks.


## Nine point five. Monitoring

Nine point five point one. Fishery observing

As with most other commercial trawl fisheries on the U.S. west coast, the U.S. Pacific hake fishery is currently fully monitored by observers both for total


## catch and to account for bycatch of other fish stocks. Observers also collect biological samples for stock assessment-related scientific work. The U.S. fishery observers began monitoring Pacific hake catch on foreign vessels in 1977, more than two decades before most other U.S. west coast fisheries carried observers. Domestic catcher-processors and at-sea processing vessels, or motherships, voluntarily began carrying observers in 1991, in what was essentially an outgrowth of the observing conducted on many of these same vessels in the Alaska walleye pollock fishery. From 2004 to 2010, vessels delivering Pacific hake to shoreside plants operated under an electronic monitoring program that required no at-sea discarding of catch, at-sea monitoring using cameras and catch monitors at the shoreside processing facilities to record catch and bycatch. Since 2011, comprehensive observer coverage in the U.S. Pacific hake fishery has been mandatory, with human observers onboard catcher-processors, motherships, catcher vessels delivering to motherships and catcher vessels delivering to shoreside plants; there are also port samplers that monitor the catch delivered to shoreside plants.

catch and to account for bycatch of other fish stocks. Observers also collect biological samples for stock assessment-related scientific work. The U.S. fishery observers began monitoring Pacific hake catch on foreign vessels in 1977, more than two decades before most other U.S. west coast fisheries carried observers. Domestic catcher-processors and at-sea processing vessels (motherships) vol- untarily began carrying observers in 1991, in what was essentially an outgrowth of the observing conducted on many of these same vessels in the Alaska walleye pollock fishery. From 2004 to 2010, vessels delivering Pacific hake to shore- side plants operated under an electronic monitoring program that required no at-sea discarding of catch, at-sea monitoring using cameras and catch mon- itors at the shoreside processing facilities to record catch and bycatch. Since 2011, comprehensive observer coverage in the U.S. Pacific hake fishery has been mandatory, with human observers onboard catcher-processors, mother- ships, catcher vessels delivering to motherships and catcher vessels delivering to shoreside plants; there are also port samplers that monitor the catch delivered to shoreside plants.

Canada first deployed fishery observers on foreign vessels targeting Pacific hake in 1987. Since 1996, on-board observers have monitored and sampled the catch of all domestic groundfish vessels, and all landed catch from trawlers is subject to a dockside monitoring program. Currently, surveillance and monitoring measures include a combination of at-sea observers, ten to one hundred percent coverage, on vessels fishing for Pacific hake in Canadian waters, for headed-gutted freezer vessels, one hundred percent at-sea observer coverage is required; electronic monitoring, such as deck cameras, and full retention of all fish brought on board; and one hundred percent dockside, offload, monitoring. This monitoring program is supplemented by coast-wide surveillance via over-flights by fishery enforcement officers and patrol vessels.


## Nine point five point two. Fishery-independent surveys

The adult stock of coastal Pacific hake has been surveyed acoustically starting in, although earlier surveys covered only part of the coastal stock's range. The stock was surveyed on a triennial basis from 1977 through 2001 with a switch to a biennial schedule from 2003 to 2011. A supplemental survey was conducted in 2012, followed by the regular biennial survey in 2013. Surveys between 1977 and 1992 were conducted entirely by the NOAA's Alaska Fisheries Science Center. In 1995, the operation became a joint United States-Canada survey with the addition of the Department of Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Pacific Biological Station, and in 2003, NOAA's Northwest Fisheries Science Center took over the U.S. portion of the survey.

The acoustic survey is conducted in the summer months, from mid-June through early September, typically moving south to north from Monterey, California, to Dixon Entrance, Alaska, using a design that covers waters from about fifty to fifteen hundred meters deep along parallel transects at ten-nautical mile spacing. The parallel transect design was developed when computing power and


## Biology, fisheries, assessment and management of Pacific hake

analytical techniques designed to minimise or remove spatial and/or temporal autocorrelation in data were limited. Recent surveys have used geostatistical analysis techniques, i.e. kriging, to compute biomass and variance, and as a result, zigzag transects or other less-regular transect designs could be used in the future. In some years, the survey has had to extend farther south or north in response to observed hake aggregations to cover the entire extent of the stock. The survey was expanded in the nineteen nineties to include northern and offshore areas of the hake distribution that had not been included in the original survey design, and a set of expansion factors were calculated in an attempt to calibrate the early survey data years so that they would be roughly comparable to the updated survey design. However, this proved an unresolvable task given the natural variation in northern migration between years.

The survey relies on thirty-eight kilohertz as the primary acoustic frequency to estimate Pacific hake biomass, although additional frequencies as available on the U.S. and Canadian survey vessels are also used to help distinguish hake from other acoustic targets. Acoustic backscatter attributed to Pacific hake is scaled to biomass or abundance using a length-based model of target strength, the log-transformed acoustic backscatter expected from a single fish or unit biomass. In nineteen ninety-five, this model was changed from a weight-based target strength of negative thirty-five decibels per kilogram to a target strength-length relation of target strength equals twenty log L minus sixty-eight, where L is fork length in centimetres. Variability in Pacific hake target strength has continued to be an active area of research; data from the most recent field measurements were generally consistent with mean and variation indicated in Traynor nineteen ninety-six.

Sources of uncertainty in the acoustic surveys of Pacific hake abundance involve climate-ocean effects on distribution and availability of fish to the survey, the ability to acoustically differentiate Pacific hake from other acoustic targets and the uncertainty in Pacific hake target strength. For example, the current stock assessment models use the acoustic-based survey biomass indices from nineteen ninety-five to present only, excluding the earlier surveys that had reduced spatial coverage and used a different target strength model. A second example of the uncertainty in acoustic surveys occurred during the two thousand nine acoustic survey with the northward expansion of Humboldt squid into the California Current Large Marine Ecosystem. Several factors make it difficult to acoustically distinguish Humboldt squid and Pacific hake: the target strength and frequency response of Humboldt squid are similar to those of Pacific hake. There was overlap in the depth and geographic ranges of both species in two thousand nine, and squid predation may cause an avoidance response leading to altered aggregation behaviour in hake. Because the proportions of backscatter attributable to hake and Humboldt squid were based on limited information, the estimated uncertainty of the acoustic survey biomass estimate was higher in two thousand nine than in other survey years. Further irruptions of Humboldt squid have not been observed during hake acoustic surveys since two thousand nine.


## Hakes

Nine point six Assessment and management strategy evaluation

Age-structured models have been used to model the population dynamics of the coastal stock of Pacific hake since the early nineteen eighties. Cohort analyses were replaced by statistical catch-at-age models by the early nineteen nineties. These latter models provide a time series of estimates of total biomass, biomass-at-age, spawning biomass and age-zero recruits. The current assessment model relies on catch, survey indices, weight-at-age and age composition data. The two thousand thirteen assessment estimated a mean unfished female spawning biomass of a little more than two million tonnes, with a female spawning biomass at the beginning of two thousand thirteen of one point five million tonnes, or seventy-two percent of unfished equilibrium female spawning biomass. Assessments have consistently found that the population dynamics of Pacific hake are characterised by infrequent large year classes, including from the years nineteen eighty, nineteen eighty-four and nineteen ninety-nine, and potentially two thousand eight and two thousand ten. These large year classes have sustained the population, through long periods with moderate to low recruitments.

Prior to nineteen ninety-seven, separate Canadian and U.S. assessments for Pacific hake were submitted to each nation's assessment review process, which resulted in differing yield options being forwarded to each country's managers for this shared trans-boundary fish stock. Multiple interpretations of Pacific hake status made it difficult to coordinate an overall management policy. From nineteen ninety-seven through two thousand ten, the Stock Assessment and Review process for the PFMC in the United States evaluated assessment models and the PFMC council process, including NOAA Fisheries, has generated management advice that has been largely utilised by both nations. In two thousand three, the United States and Canada signed the Treaty, which specifies science and management processes. The terms of the treaty were not fully implemented until two thousand twelve, but stock assessments and management activities have conformed to the treaty for many years. Under the Treaty, Pacific hake stock assessments are prepared by the JTC composed of both U.S. and Canadian scientists and reviewed by the SRG, with members of both groups appointed by both Parties to the agreement. In two thousand twelve, after formal appointments were made to Treaty-specific committees, the stock was assessed and managed under the full auspices of the treaty for the first time. Between two thousand three and two thousand eleven, the Parties honoured the intent of the Treaty during its implementation, which included joint stock assessment reviews and allocations to each country based on the Treaty allocation structure.

The two thousand thirteen assessment was a fully Bayesian assessment conducted using the Stock Synthesis modelling platform, with the base-case model incorporating prior information on two key parameters, natural mortality, and steepness of the stock-recruit relationship, and integrating over estimation and parameter uncertainty to provide results that could be probabilistically interpreted. The base case model showed large variations in Pacific hake biomass over the past four decades, largely related to variation in recruitment, with an apparent strong year


## Biology, fisheries, assessment and management of Pacific hake

class in two thousand ten driving an increase in biomass at the end of the time series. From a range of alternate models investigated by the JTC, a subset of sensitivity analyses was also reported in order to provide a broad qualitative comparison of structural uncertainty with the base case.

The two thousand thirteen assessment estimated that the stock was, in fact, not overfished in the early two thousands, reaching a low of thirty-two point three percent of unfished biomass in two thousand, but in contrast did meet the overfished definition in two thousand nine at twenty point four percent of unfished biomass. As the official declaration of overfished status in the United States applies only to a current estimate, and as Pacific hake are now managed under an international treaty that does not include an 'overfished' definition, the retrospective two thousand nine estimate in the two thousand twelve assessment does not impact current management.

A retrospective comparison of Pacific hake assessment models from nineteen ninety-one through two thousand thirteen shows considerable variability in the estimates of Pacific hake stock biomass and status. Among-model variability, particularly in the early portion of the time series, is greater than the uncertainty estimated in any individual assessment, and a substantial trend of diminishing variability is not apparent. The treatment of one parameter in particular, the catchability of the acoustic survey, has changed over time. Prior to two thousand four, this value was assumed to be one, meaning that the fully selected portions of the stock, based on age or length, were fully available to the survey and that the survey covered the entire latitudinal and longitudinal distribution of Pacific hake, and, as mentioned previously, the TS relationship was correct. During two thousand four to two thousand seven, two values for the catchability coefficient were used to parameterize what were considered equally plausible alternative models. Since this time, the catchability for the acoustic survey has been freely estimated within the assessment models, which has the effect of increasing the apparent uncertainty in the assessment results, as the uncertainty in the catchability is now accounted for, rather than ignored, in the model. In reality, the assessment is more certain than before given the addition of much more and higher quality data.

A Management Strategy Evaluation was developed in two thousand twelve. The initial goal was to explore the performance of the current default harvest control rule and the performance of stock assessment and management with annual versus biennial


## Biology, fisheries, assessment and management of Pacific hake

acoustic surveys. Using results from the two thousand twelve assessment, the MSE model simulated a known population forward in time under four scenarios: no fishing, catches determined from perfect knowledge of the spawning biomass, and catches predicted using simulated data with either annual or biennial surveys supplied to an assessment model with a similar setup to the two thousand twelve assessment. Preliminary results show good progress in developing an MSE with the need for additional input from industry and managers. Although the assumptions were simplistic and the results are not recommended to be used for management advice, they do suggest that the default harvest rate would result in an average female spawning biomass slightly below B forty percent, but with high variability, with median biomass near B thirty percent. Decreasing the default harvest rate towards F fifty percent would result in larger average and median biomass, median biomass near B forty percent, with little change to average long-term catch, and while reducing the inter-annual variability in catch and biomass.


## Nine point seven. Products and markets

In product form, Pacific hake is a white-fleshed, mild-tasting fish. The early stages of the Pacific hake fishery produced mainly fillets, headed and gutted products, and fish meal, mostly for foreign markets. Initially, there was very little market in either the United States or Canada for the catch, due to problems with rapid softening of the flesh related to the presence of the parasites in the genus Kudoa. By the early nineteen nineties, quality problems were overcome by rapid cooling techniques and enzyme inhibitors, and the development of processed Pacific hake products, such as surimi, has made the fishery more profitable.

Development of large-scale domestic fisheries was thought infeasible throughout the nineteen eighties due to product quality concerns, cost of production and impediments to markets. Nonetheless, domestic capacity increased rapidly in the fishery. A unique problem with Pacific hake from the coastal stock is an endogenous protease produced in reaction to a muscle parasite. This parasite can cause proteolytic muscle disintegration, which can reduce the gel-forming ability of myofibrillar proteins in Pacific hake surimi. However, protease inhibitors can be added to the minced Pacific hake muscle to maintain gel-forming ability. The most effective protease inhibitors include bovine blood plasma proteins, egg white, potato-based inhibitors, or whey. In two thousand three, concerns about the use of bovine blood plasma, because of its potential relationship with 'mad cow' disease, affected certain markets for Pacific hake surimi.

Developments in food science and improved handling of Pacific hake onboard vessels and in processing plants have eliminated various impediments to production and marketability of Pacific hake. For example, use of cold temperature-based processes now allows for surimi production without the use of protease inhibitors.

Throughout the contemporary history of the fishery, most of the catch were processed into surimi, which is used to make shellfish analogues. In about two thousand three, the hake industries in both the United States and Canada began developing highly mechanized processing facilities to handle fish as efficiently as possible and to expand the diversity of product forms. Currently, higher economic return comes from the production of non-surimi forms, such as headed and gutted products, fillets and blocks. These forms now dominate production. While Pacific hake has never been a high-value fish, the total revenue to the industry is in the tens of millions of U.S. dollars per year - over fifty million dollars per year in recent years - and the market for Pacific hake remains strong.

The authors thank Doug Hay and Vidar Wespestad for inspiration, Martin Dorn for his early suggestions and helpful comments on an earlier draft of this chapter, John Pohl and two anonymous reviewers for their comments and suggestions and the multitude of the colleagues who have worked towards understanding, monitoring and assessing the coastal stock of Pacific hake over the years.


## Biology, fisheries, assessment and management of Pacific hake

Biology, fisheries, assessment and management of Pacific hake