## Therapeutic Hyperthermia Is Associated With Improved Survival in Afebrile Critically Patients With Sepsis: A Pilot Randomized Trial

OBJECTIVES: To test the hypothesis that forced-air warming of critically ill afebrile sepsis patients improves immune function compared to standard temperature management.

DESIGN: Single-center, prospective, open-label, randomized controlled trial. SETTING: One thousand two hundred bed academic medical center.

PATIENTS: Eligible patients were mechanically ventilated septic adults with: one) a diagnosis of sepsis within forty-eight hours of enrollment; two) anticipated need for mechanical ventilation of greater than forty-eight hours; and three) a maximum temperature less than thirty-eight point three degrees Celsius within the twenty-four hours prior to enrollment. Primary exclusion criteria included: immunologic diseases, immune-suppressing medications, and any existing condition sensitive to therapeutic hyperthermia (e.g., brain injury). The primary outcome was monocyte human leukocyte antigen D-R expression, with secondary outcomes of C-D three/C-D twenty-eight-induced interferon gamma production, mortality, and twenty-eight-day hospital-free days.

INTERVENTIONS: External warming using a forced-air warming blanket for forty-eight hours, with a goal temperature one point five degrees Celsius above the lowest temperature documented in the previous twenty-four hours.

MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: We enrolled fifty-six participants in the study. No differences were observed between the groups in human leukocyte antigen D-R expression (six hundred ninety-two versus two thousand two; P equals zero point three nine six) or interferon gamma production (thirty-one versus sixty-nine; P equals zero point six seven eight). Participants allocated to external warming had lower twenty-eight-day mortality (eighteen percent versus forty-three percent; absolute risk reduction, twenty-five percent; ninety-five percent confidence interval, two to forty-eight percent) and more twenty-eight-day hospital-free days (difference, two point six days; ninety-five percent confidence interval, zero to eleven point six).

CONCLUSIONS: Participants randomized to external forced-air warming did not have a difference in human leukocyte antigen D-R expression or interferon gamma production. In this pilot study, however, twenty-eight-day mortality was lower in the intervention group. Future research should seek to better elucidate the impact of temperature modulation on immune and nonimmune organ failure pathways in sepsis.

Fever is a key feature of infection, yet fewer than half of critically ill patients with sepsis have a fever at the time of diagnosis. Afebrile sepsis patients have up to twice the mortality and are more likely to develop secondary infections than patients with fever, but the reason for these observations is unknown. Fever may be an adaptive response to infection that is critical for survival. Animal and in vitro studies have shown elevated temperature to have beneficial effects on adaptive and innate immunity, including increased antibody production, T-cell activation, macrophage function, and heat shock protein response.

Sepsis is associated with pro- and anti-inflammatory mechanisms that can lead to prolonged periods of immunosuppression. Several biomarkers have been implicated in sepsis-induced immunosuppression, including reduced expression of human leukocyte antigen D-R, decreased lipopolysaccharide-induced tumor necrosis factor-alpha production, decreased anti-C-D three/anti-C-D twenty-eight-stimulated interferon gamma production, and persistent lymphopenia. Patients exhibiting persistently depressed levels of these immune markers suffer from higher mortality and increased secondary infections compared to patients with intact immunity. While fever has been associated with immunocompetence, the role of temperature itself has not been rigorously evaluated.

Therapeutic hyperthermia, artificially raising body temperature through external warming, has been used for immunomodulation to treat several types of cancer. This strategy is thought to improve function of natural killer cells, dendritic cells, and T cells. In addition, perioperative warming has consistently been shown to decrease postoperative infections. As a whole, these data provide compelling biologic rationale that therapeutic hyperthermia may be an effective treatment for sepsis.

The objective of this trial was to determine whether forced-air warming of critically ill afebrile sepsis patients improves immune function compared to standard temperature management. We hypothesized that warmed patients would exhibit higher levels of human leukocyte antigen D-R expression and C-D three/C-D twenty-eight-stimulated interferon gamma production and a reduced prevalence of persistent lymphopenia. We also aimed to assess the feasibility and safety of raising body temperature in critically ill sepsis patients and to evaluate the impact of warming on clinical outcomes.


## MATERIALS AND METHODS

Study Design

This study was a single-center, prospective, open-label, randomized controlled trial comparing external warming of afebrile critically ill adult sepsis patients to usual care. The trial reviewed by and approved by the Washington University Human Research Protection Office (Institutional Review Board Number twenty fifteen twelve twelve one two one) and was registered on ClinicalTrials.

gov. Written informed consent was obtained from legally authorized representatives, and this study is reported in accordance with the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials Statement extension for pilot/feasibility trials. The study protocol is included in Appendix A.


## Participants

This study was conducted in the medical and surgical I C Us of a one thousand two hundred bed tertiary care academic medical center between March two thousand sixteen and April two thousand nineteen. Adult patients admitted to the I C U with a diagnosis of severe sepsis were screened daily by a study coordinator for inclusion. Severe sepsis was defined according to the two thousand one Sepsis Taskforce consensus statement, and a post hoc review verified that all included patients met Sepsis-three criteria. Enrollment criteria also required participants to be enrolled within forty-eight hours of sepsis diagnosis (defined as the date/time of the first order for antibiotics), mechanically ventilated with an expected duration of mechanical ventilation greater than forty-eight hours, receiving continuous pharmacologic sedation with a Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale less than zero, and having a maximum temperature less than thirty-eight point three degrees Celsius within the twenty-four hours prior to enrollment. Exclusion criteria included: history of immunological disease; treatment with immunosuppressive medications within the previous six months; treatment with corticosteroids at a dose of greater than three hundred milligrams per day hydrocortisone or equivalent at the time of enrollment; history of chronic infection with hepatitis B or C virus; contraindications to hyperthermia (e.g., sudden cardiac arrest, acute ischemic stroke, acute coronary syndrome, traumatic brain injury or spinal cord injury, sickle cell disease, or multiple sclerosis); pregnancy; comfort care treatment status; contraindications to forced-air warming devices per manufacture instructions (i.e., ischemic limbs); or enrollment in another clinical trial. These inclusion/exclusion criteria were selected to maximize participant safety and tolerance of the intervention and to exclude participants in whom immune biomarkers were unreliable or who might be harmed by artificially elevated body temperature. Patients admitted to the I C Us were screened daily and eligible patients were consecutively approached for enrollment.


## Randomization

Participants were randomized to usual care or to the study intervention in a one-to-one ratio by computer-generated, block randomization with variable block size (using random blocks of two, four, and six) to ensure allocation concealment. An allocation table based on this randomization scheme was uploaded to Research Electronic Data Capture, a secure, web-based application for research data management, by a statistician. A study coordinator obtained the randomization code for each patient from the Research Electronic Data Capture database after informed consent had been obtained. Block randomization was used to ensure similar numbers of participants in each study group given the overall small sample size, which was calculated a priori.


## Study Treatments

The study intervention consisted of forty-eight hours of external warming with a forced-air warming system to a goal core temperature one point five degrees Celsius greater than the lowest recorded temperature in the twenty-four hours prior to enrollment or to at least thirty-seven point five degrees Celsius (whichever was higher). This goal temperature was chosen based on evidence from preliminary studies in our laboratory showing improved monocyte HLA-DR expression in patients with a one point five degrees Celsius increase in minimum body temperature during the first forty-eight hours after sepsis diagnosis. All participants enrolled in the study had temperature monitoring using a core temperature monitor (esophageal, bladder, or rectal). Immediately following randomization to the intervention group, a forced-air warming blanket on the highest setting (forty-three degrees Celsius) was applied to participant with the aim of attaining the target temperature within six hours of warming onset. After six hours, if the goal temperature was not achieved, warm blankets were added on top of the forced-air blanket and the room temperature was increased. Once the goal temperature was achieved, the forced-air blanket was used to maintain the temperature above the goal for the remainder of the intervention period.

The warming intervention was terminated early if any of the following criteria were met: vasopressor increase greater than fifty percent for six hours and greater than zero point one micrograms per kilogram per minute norepinephrine-equivalent dose, heart rate increase by greater than twenty-five beats per minute and heart rate greater than ninety, evidence of thermal skin injury, or extubation. These termination criteria were chosen to avoid negative adverse effects of hyperthermia and to ensure participant comfort.

Participants randomized to the control group received usual care temperature management in accordance with our current Intensive Care Unit protocols during the forty-eight-hour intervention period, at the discretion of the clinical team.


## Data Collection

Demographics, comorbidities, microbiological culture results, and sources of sepsis were extracted from the electronic medical record. Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation Two scores were calculated based on data from the first twenty-four hours in the Intensive Care Unit. Sequential Organ Failure Assessment scores (excluding the Glasgow Coma Score component) were calculated prior to and following the intervention period. Throughout the forty-eight-hour intervention period, core body temperatures were recorded hourly. Mean arterial blood pressure, vasopressor dose (in norepinephrine-equivalents), and heart rate were documented every six hours. If warming was terminated early in the participants randomized to the study intervention, the reason for termination was noted. Blood samples were collected at randomization (days one to two after sepsis diagnosis) and following the forty-eight-hour intervention period (days three to four after sepsis diagnosis) to evaluate markers of immune function. Absolute lymphocyte counts from complete blood cell counts ordered by the treating clinical team were recorded from the electronic health record for the first seven days following sepsis diagnosis.


## Outcomes

The primary outcome was monocyte HLA-DR expression following the forty-eight-hour intervention period. This outcome was chosen because one, HLA-DR expression is one of the most widely accepted measures of sepsis-induced immunosuppression; two, low levels are associated with mortality and acquisition of nosocomial infection in septic patients; and three, our preliminary data suggested HLA-DR expression is higher in patients who experience fever during the first forty-eight hours of sepsis. Secondary immune outcomes included CD3/CD28-induced Interferon Gamma production following the intervention period and prevalence of persistent lymphopenia (defined as an absolute lymphocyte count less than one point two cells per microliter times one thousand three, which is the lower limit of normal at our institution, persisting beyond seventy-two hours after sepsis diagnosis. Clinical outcomes included the delta-SOFA score (change in SOFA score based on laboratory studies and vital signs from the twenty-four-hour period prior to the start of the intervention compared to score based on data from the twenty-four-hour period after completion of the intervention), twenty-eight-day hospital-free days, twenty-eight-day ventilator-free days, acquisition of secondary infections, and twenty-eight-day mor- tality. Secondary infections were defined as new pos- itive cultures or new antibiotics started after forty-eight hours and documentation of a new confirmed infection by the treating clinical team.

The safety outcomes of interest were vasopressor dose (expressed as norepinephrine-equivalent dose), heart rate, and respiratory rate.


## Immunological Testing

Immunological testing was performed by laboratory technicians blinded to participant group allocation. Quantification of monocyte HLA-DR was performed according to the Demaret method, as previously described. Whole blood was incubated with BD Quantibrite anti-HLA-DR/anti-monocyte stain (Becton-Dickinson, San Jose, California), lysed using RBC Lysis Buffer (BioLegend, San Diego, California), and fixed in two percent paraformaldehyde. Samples were acquired on a FACScan (Becton-Dickinson) with a five-color up- grade (CyTech, Fremont, California). Flow files were acquired and analyzed in CellQuest Pro (Becton-Dickinson). Antibodies bound per cell were calculated by standardizing HLA-DR geomean fluorescent intensity of monocytes to BD Quantibrite-phycoerythrin beads (Becton-Dickinson).

CD3/CD28-induced IFN-y production was deter- mined using an Enzyme-Linked Immunospot assay, as previously described. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells harvested from whole blood plated at a standardized density, five hundred thousand cells per well, using the Vi-Cell counter (Beckman Coulter, Brea, California) in wells coated with biotinylated capture antibody spe- cific to IFN-y. Cells were incubated overnight with Roswell Park Memorial Institute sixteen-forty media (Sigma- Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri) containing anti-CD3/anti-CD28 (BioLegend). IFN-y was detected using a colorimetric reagent kit (Strep-AP and BCIP-NBT; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, Minnesota). Images from the ELISpot plates

(made by MilliporeSigma, Burlington, Massachusetts; and acquired through Fisher Scientific, Hampton, New Hampshire) were analyzed on ImmunoSpot seven point zero plate reader and software (Cellular Technologies Limited, Shaker Heights, Ohio). The number of spots, representing cells producing IFN- y, and mean spot size were recorded. The means of two identically treated plates run in duplicate were calculated.


## Sample Size Determination

To detect a difference in HLA-DR expression of twelve thousand antibodies bound per cell with a power of eighty percent using a two-sided alpha equals zero point zero five, a total of forty-four sepsis participants (twenty-two patients per arm) were required. The detectable difference in HLA-DR expres- sion was the magnitude of the difference in patients with who did and did not experience an increase in body temperature of one point five degrees Celsius within twenty-four hours of sepsis diagnosis in our preliminary data. Anticipating control group mortality of twenty percent prior to acquisition of the postintervention blood sample, enrollment of fifty-six participants was planned.


## Statistical Analysis

Data were analyzed on an intention-to-treat basis re- gardless of whether temperature goals were met in the intervention group. Descriptive statistics are pre- sented as counts, means, and medians, as appropriate. Temperature and care-associated variables were com- pared using t tests, repeated measures analysis of vari- ance, Mann-Whitney U tests, or chi-square tests as appropriate. The primary HLA-DR and sec- ondary serum IFN-y analyses were performed among participants who had nonmissing values for both the baseline and follow-up immune outcomes using re- peated measures ANOVA. Hospital-free days and ven- tilator-free days were compared using nonparametric tests. To ensure that any twenty-eight-day mortality difference observed was not attributable to confounding by illness severity, we conducted a post hoc multivariable logistic regression analysis, including predictors of both treat- ment group assignment and enrollment SOFA score. All analyses were conducted in Stata version sixteen point one (StataCorp LLC, College Station, Texas).


## RESULTS

We enrolled fifty-six participants (twenty-eight in each arm), with none lost to follow-up.


## Baseline Characteristics

covariates at randomization. The most common source of infection was pneumonia (n equals twenty-nine), and the most common reason for exclusion was concurrent immune suppression.

The temperature in participants randomized to ther- apeutic warming during the study period was higher than those allocated to usual care (repeated measures ANOVA) (Fig. one). Twenty-six participants (ninety-three percent) in the warming group achieved target tempera- ture, with eighteen (sixty-nine percent) reaching the target within six hours. The median time to target temperature was three hours (interquartile range, two to four hours) in the warming group. Ten participants (thirty-six percent) had warming terminated prior to forty-eight hours, with the most common reason being extubation during the intervention period (n equals five). Two participants had missing immune bio- marker values, one due to death prior to sample being drawn and one due to misplacement of the sample (these cases were excluded from immune biomarker analysis). Corticosteroid therapy was administered during the ICU stay (after randomization) for nine control participants (thirty-two percent) and eight intervention par- ticipants (twenty-nine percent).


## Immunological Outcomes

HLA-DR expression at enrollment was similar be- tween the two groups (difference sixty-three point eight, antibodies bound per cell; ninety-five percent CI, negative three thousand three hundred thirty-six point eight to three thousand four hundred sixty-four point four). For our primary outcome,

there was no difference between treatment and control groups in monocyte HLA-DR expression following the forty-eight-hour intervention period (differ- ence, negative one thousand three hundred ten point four; ninety-five percent CI, negative four thousand five hundred thirty-seven point five to one thousand nine hundred sixteen point eight; Fig. two). Overall, patients who died had lower HLA-DR ex- pression at enrollment (mean six thousand five hundred twenty-two point four vs ten thousand four hundred thirty-eight point five).

(p equals zero point zero three). CD3/CD28-induced IFN-y production was similar between groups at baseline (difference, negative two hundred thirty-one point one; ninety-five percent CI, negative five hundred twenty-eight point five to sixty-six point two), and no difference was observed at three to four days (difference, negative thirty-eight point zero; ninety-five percent CI, negative two hundred twenty point four to one hundred forty-four point four). Persistent lymphopenia was similar between the groups (fifty percent vs forty-three percent; difference, negative seven percent; ninety-five percent CI, negative thirty-three to nineteen).


## Clinical Outcomes

Participants randomized to therapeutic warming had lower twenty-eight-day mortality than those in the control group (eighteen percent vs forty-three percent; absolute risk reduction, twenty-five percent; ninety-five percent confidence interval, negative forty-eight to negative two; Figure three). Post hoc adjustment of the twenty-eight-day mortality outcome for enrollment SOFA score revealed similar effect of treatment group allocation (adjusted odds ratio, zero point one five one; ninety-five percent confidence interval, zero point zero two nine to zero point seven eight nine). They also had more twenty-eight-day hospital-free days (two point six days; ninety-five percent confidence interval, zero to eleven point six days). There were no differences between twenty-eight-day ventilator-free days or the forty-eight-hour delta-SOFA score. Secondary infections were common (thirty percent), but they were not different between the two groups.


## Safety Outcomes

Participants randomized to therapeutic warming had similar vasopressor doses and vital signs during their intervention period compared to control participants.

Vasopressor dose was reached in two participants (seven percent) leading to termination of warming, but the same vasopressor criterion was met in four control participants (fourteen percent). No participants met the predetermined stopping rules for heart rate or respiratory rate.


## DISCUSSION

In this pilot randomized controlled trial, we demonstrated that therapeutic hyperthermia in afebrile critically ill patients with sepsis was feasible, but we did not observe a difference in monocyte HLA-DR expression, induced interferon gamma production, or lymphopenia. We also did not observe more adverse events in the therapeutic hyperthermia group. We did, however, observe decreased mortality and increased twenty-eight-day hospital-free days in the group that underwent therapeutic hyperthermia. These are important observations because they suggest there may be a clinical benefit of this treatment, although the biological mechanism and replicability in a larger trial remain unknown.

The risk of hypothermia and the survival benefit of fever in patients with sepsis are well described. A meta-analysis of observational studies cited a pooled estimate of a forty-seven percent mortality in hypothermic patients with sepsis versus twenty-two percent mortality in those with fever. While the control group mortality in our trial was high, it tracks closely with the mortality observed in prior cohorts of afebrile critically ill sepsis patients. Perhaps more compelling, participants allocated to therapeutic hyperthermia experienced a mortality that was more closely aligned with expected mortality in febrile sepsis patients. Studies of antipyretic therapy in sepsis have demonstrated little benefit. A single trial of external cooling in febrile sepsis patients showed reduced vasopressor doses and lower early mortality in febrile patients cooled to normothermia, but these findings were not replicated in a subsequent randomized trial. The inflammatory cascade, cytokine expression, and transcription factors in febrile sepsis patients are likely different from afebrile sepsis patients, and having experienced fever may confer benefit to immunocompetent sepsis patients that cannot be undone with cooling.

The mechanism through which therapeutic hyperthermia may have affected clinical outcomes in this study is unclear. Previous data have demonstrated that, compared to afebrile patients with sepsis, febrile patients had a greater increase in monocyte HLA-DR early after sepsis diagnosis, suggesting a lower prevalence of sepsis-induced immunosuppression in patients with fever. Fever and therapeutic hyperthermia, although, are fundamentally different conditions, and the relationship between fever and HLA-DR expression may be mediated via the inflammatory cascade involved in fever production rather than by heat itself. Notably, the survival curves in our study diverged around day ten, which indicates the effect of warming may be late. Given the breadth of immune changes caused by hyperthermia in animal and in vitro studies, immune-related mechanisms may have played in a role in the clinical outcomes seen in this study, despite our negative immune findings. Alternatively, therapeutic hyperthermia may benefit septic patients through nonimmune mechanisms, such as direct effects on microbial clearance, augmentation of antibiotic activity, or temperature-dependent changes in blood flow. Regardless, this is the first article that has supported the hypothesis that temperature plays a causal role in survival from life-threatening infection.

Another interesting observation in this trial was that forced-air warming alone could effectively warm patients in a short time, even above thirty-seven degrees Celsius. This finding suggests that the absence of fever was not an adaptive process associated with a change in set point. Rather, insufficient cytokine response or mitochondrial dysfunction may have contributed to hypothermia, and when adequate heat was applied, substantive temperature elevations could be realized.

Our observation should be confirmed in a multicenter clinical trial powered for clinical outcomes. That trial should better elucidate the most effective temperature target, duration of treatment, and mechanism of effect to fully understand how temperature management might be used in clinical practice. Better understanding the impact of temperature on sepsis physiology and the heterogeneity of treatment effects will be critical to defining the clinical application of sepsis warming.

This trial has several limitations. First, temperature augmentation was modest, with over twenty-five percent of our warmed participants not achieving febrile-range hyperthermia. Second, we used a warming technique that was limited in its ability to achieve very high temperatures. Future trials targeting higher temperatures may need to use technology able to transfer more heat. Third, our control group mortality was very high. Although prior studies of hypothermia in sepsis have observed similarly high mortality, our inclusion criteria intentionally selected a group of participants with high predicted mortality. Fourth, our primary outcome could not be measured in one participant who died or in any patients were immune suppressed. These eligibility criteria may limit generalizability if hyperthermia were ultimately found to be effective. Finally, our small sample size also makes type one error more likely, so future larger multicenter trials should be conducted to ensure balance on important covariates.

In conclusion, induced hyperthermia did not improve early markers of immune function, but in our pilot randomized trial warming was associated with lower mortality. The pathway responsible for our findings is unclear. Future work should seek to confirm our clinical findings in an adequately powered multicenter clinical trial and to better understand mechanistic changes in sepsis physiology associated with temperature modulation.