## A Ferric-Superoxide Intermediate Initiates P four fifty-Catalyzed Cyclic Dipeptide Dimerization

INTRODUCTION

The regio- and stereo-selective formation of C-C and C-N bonds represents a fundamental yet synthetically challenging step required for the production of many valuable drugs and agrochemicals. Genome mining efforts have revealed several enzymatic strategies employed by nature to catalyze these reactions for the biosynthesis of important natural products. Arguably, the best characterized class of enzymes known for this type of reactivity are radical S-adenosylmethionine enzymes, which use powerful radical-mediated chemistry to catalyze various types of C-C bond formation and a breadth of other reactions. In addition to radical S-adenosylmethionine enzymes, the analysis of biosynthetic gene clusters has shown a preponderance of mononuclear heme and nonheme enzymes responsible for catalyzing the oxidative formation of C is p two-C is p three, C is p two-N is p two, and C is p three-N is p two bonds. Inter- and intra-molecular bond formation by cytochrome P four fiftys is prevalent in the biosynthesis of pharmacophores that include phenol cross-link formation during the assembly of glycopeptide antibiotics (e.g., teicoplanin and vancomycin) and desertorin or orlandin alkaloids, flaviolin dimerization, tryptophan nitration, and amination for indolactam generation, among others. Cytochrome P four fiftys have also been recently shown to dimerize tryptophan-containing cyclic dipeptides.

Tryptophan-linked dimeric two, five-diketopiperazine alkaloids are a large family of natural products that are found in numerous species and exhibit broad and often potent (e.g., antimicrobial and antiparasitic) cytotoxicity. One route for dimer biosynthesis consists of a cyclodipeptide synthase enzyme that converts two amino acid charged tRNA molecules to form a cyclic dipeptide. Cytochrome P four fiftys, prevalent in many bacterial cyclodipeptide synthase-containing biosynthetic gene clusters, have been found to catalyze the downstream dimerization of diketopiperazine dipeptides through an oxidative mechanism that has yet to be clarified. One such pathway, shown in Figure one A, is found in Streptomyces sp. NRRL S-eighteen sixty-eight and consists of the cyclodipeptide synthase AspA that generates cyclo-L-tryptophan-L-proline, also termed brevianamide F. The cytochrome P four fifty AspB subsequently forms the N one- C seven'-linked dimer termed aspergilazine A (Figure one A). Cytochrome P four fiftys that share a very high degree of sequence identity to AspB have been found to catalyze different modes of cyclo-L-tryptophan-L-proline dimerization, including the C three-C six' and intramolecular C-N linkage of naseseazine C by NascB. Another recently discovered cytochrome P four fifty NzeB was found to have more relaxed regio- and stereo- specificity to form mixtures of both aspergilazine A and naseseazine C. The divergent chemoselectivity of cytochrome P four fifty dimerases provides an attractive alternative to synthetic routes for late-stage functionalization, particularly for the assembly of asymmetric diketopiperazine-dimers.

Despite the prevalence of cytochrome P four fifty-catalyzed C-C/C-N bond formation in a number of important natural product biosynthesis pathways, very little is known regarding the enzymatic basis for catalyzing a reaction outcome that profoundly differs from the "oxygen addition" (e.g., monooxygenation) reactions that have been the subject of intense scrutiny for many decades. Both radical coupling and cationic pathways have been shown to be energetically plausible, and the most commonly invoked mechanism involves a primary oxidation catalyzed by an iron four-oxo pi cation radical intermediate, followed by a secondary oxidation by the resultant iron plus plus-OH compound two. However, direct insight into this process is extremely limited due to the complexity in preparation of the substrates involved (a carrier- protein-linked peptide in the case of glycopeptide antibiotics), direct access to the fleeting intermediates in the catalytic cycle, or both.

In this study, we use a combination of steady-state and transient kinetics, alternative substrate analogs, and single turnover approaches to evaluate the mechanism for C-N bond formation by the cytochrome P four fifty diketopiperazine-dimerase AspB. The data provide kinetic and spectroscopic evidence for the unexpected reactivity of an iron-superoxide intermediate for initiating substrate dimerization to form aspergilazine A. We also demonstrate that this reaction trajectory is generalizable to C-C bond formation catalyzed by NzeB. This catalytic strategy rationalizes the circumnavigation of canonical cytochrome P four fifty ferryl reactivity to promote selective bond formation that may be extended to the biosynthesis of many other natural products.


## RESULTS

Inverse Steady-State Kinetic Solvent Isotope Effect in AspB-Catalyzed Formation of Aspergilazine A. As very little is known about the mechanism for cytochrome P four fifty-catalyzed oxidative diketopiperazine-dimerization, we sought to explore the basis for C-N bond formation using the diketopiperazine dimerase AspB. In vitro multiple turnover studies with recombinant AspB and a surrogate redox partner system composed of spinach ferredoxin, ferredoxin reductase, and NADPH as a source of reducing equivalents resulted in nearly complete consumption of the cyclo-L-tryptophan-L-proline substrate to form one major product (ninety-eight percent) and minor amount of another product with m/z equals five hundred sixty-five corresponding to a diketopiperazine dimer. The highly chemoselective profile is in good agreement with prior in vivo fermentation experiments by Li et al., which showed that ninety-eight percent of the substrate was converted to aspergilazine A, while the other two percent corresponded to two other diketopiperazine dimers with varying linkages. Thus, we assigned the major product peak as aspergilazine A.

The C-N linkage of two molecules of cWP involves a two-electron oxidation of the substrates, and mechanisms that are initiated by indole or DKP N-H abstraction by CYP-I have been advanced. A structural alignment of AspB with other well-characterized CYP monooxygenases shows a distinct alteration of residues at the I-helix that are known to be critical for O-O heterolysis in O two-activating CYPs. Notably, AspB lacks the highly conserved acid (Asp or Glu) on the I-helix distal pocket that forms half of the "acid-alcohol pair" that is crucial for mediating proton delivery to the ferric peroxo-anion intermediate. Due to this deviation (a proline is found at the corresponding position in AspB), we performed steady-state kinetic solvent isotope effect (KSIE) experiments to determine if an alternative mode of proton delivery was operant. A comparison of the rates of product formation by AspB in H two O and D two O buffers revealed an inverse KSIE of zero point six six ± zero point one. This phenomenon is highly unusual for a P four fifty that employs CYP-I as an oxidant, as rate-limiting proton-transfer steps are involved in its generation. Furthermore, increasing the concentration of protons in AspB reactions by lowering the pH resulted in a slower rate of product formation. This is the opposite trend from what was previously observed for the analogous I-helix acid mutant (D two fifty one N) in the camphor monooxygenase CYP one-oh-one. In that case, an increase in the turnover rate and corresponding approximately five-fold increase in the KSIE at lower pH was attributed to an extended proton-delivery chain involved in the generation of CYP-I. In contrast, the availability of protons appears to impede product formation in AspB despite the absence of an I-helix acid.

Inverse KSIEs have been reported for some atypical P four fifty reactions and used as a rationale to invoke intermediates that precede compound I. These include substrate transformations that are either postulated or demonstrated to be mediated by a ferric-peroxoanion species, such as the seventeen, twenty lyase chemistry catalyzed by CYP seventeen A one in the conversion of seventeen-hydroxypregnenolone to dehydroepiandrosterone, and more recently, an epoxide ring-opening cascade of tirandamycin L by mutants of the CYP TamI. However, the nucleophilicity of a ferric peroxoanion complex would make it unlikely to serve as an effective reagent for cWP dimerization.


## Transient Kinetic Studies. To gain insight into the potential involvement of an alternative oxidant in AspB, we

performed stopped-flow absorption experiments at four degrees Celsius where the reduced enzyme-substrate (E-S) complex was rapidly mixed with excess O two. The resulting ferric-superoxide (or "oxy") complex represents the last semistable intermediate in CYP catalysis and the first branchpoint between productive catalysis and uncoupling. The intermediate can either decay via the release of superoxide via autoxidation, or if a second reducing equivalent is suitably provided, be further activated to form a (hydro)peroxo or CYP-I following the O-O bond cleavage. In the first one hundred milliseconds after mixing of the reduced substrate-saturated AspB with excess O two, the ferrous enzyme rapidly decays to form a new species with absorption characteristics (Soret approximately four hundred twenty-four nanometers and merged Q-bands approximately five hundred fifty-six nanometers and a shoulder approximately five hundred eighty-five nanometers) that are similar to other reported Fe three plus-O two negative complexes. As a second electron is not provided for catalysis to occur, one would anticipate that autoxidation should result in reformation of the ferric enzyme-substrate bound resting state. Substrate-saturated AspB is composed of a mixture of high- and low-spin (HS and LS) species (approximately fifteen percent HS at four degrees Celsius). However, the AspB oxy-complex appears to directly decay to a purely LS-form from zero point one to two point five seconds.

Two A) with optical features that closely resemble the substrate-free ferric resting state, before slowly returning to the original mixture of HS and LS species over the following forty seconds. Analysis of the timecourse for cWP-bound oxy-AspB formation and decay at four hundred forty nanometers required fitting to a three summed exponential. A single rate of formation approximately twenty-eight point one per second and two decay phases (two point two and zero point zero four per second) represent the primary decomposition of the oxy-ferrous species to the initial LS-species and the subsequent slower generation of the enzyme-substrate complex. Evaluation of the kinetics of oxy formation and decay with varying oxygen concentrations show that only the first kinetic phase (oxy-formation) is oxygen-dependent as expected, while the latter phases are independent of oxygen concentration. Further comments on the assignment of each of these phases are provided in the Supporting Information Methods.

The direct transition of ferric to a pure LS species is atypical for substrate-bound CYPs and suggests a process that is more complex than autoxidation. Nonetheless, we have previously observed similar behavior in the hydrogen peroxide-dependent CYP OleT. In that case, autoxidation, which ultimately furnishes hydrogen peroxide, can react with the ferric-heme to initiate catalysis. However, AspB is unable to effectively metabolize cWP using a peroxide-shunt pathway, and the inclusion of catalase did not alter the kinetic behavior for oxy-decomposition, unlike what was found for OleT. Another notable deviation from typical CYP behavior is seen when comparing the decay rates of the oxy-complex for the substrate-bound and free enzyme. In the absence of the substrate, AspB-oxy decays directly back to the ferric resting state. For many CYPs, a bound substrate typically extends the lifetime of the first dioxygen intermediate, occasionally upward of one hundred-fold, thus allowing second electron transfer event to occur and minimizing the generation of reactive oxygen species. However, there is no significant difference in the decay rate constants for AspB decomposition in the presence or absence of the substrate (two point two plus or minus zero point three per second for substrate-free oxy).

N-Methylated Substrate Derivative Stabilizes the Oxy Complex. We synthesized a substrate derivative where the indole nitrogen was methylated, termed N1-methyl cWP, as computational studies by Sherman and colleagues have suggested that DKP-dimerization by AspB may be afforded by primary indole N-H abstraction. AspB displayed very similar binding characteristics and maximal spin-state conversion with N1-methyl cWP. The crystal structure of N1-methyl cWP-bound AspB was solved to one point eight six Angstrom resolution. As in the crystal structure of AspB bound to cWP, two molecules of N1-methyl cWP are found bound in the active site in close vicinity to the heme cofactor. The first substrate molecule, shown in blue, displays some minor structural differences from that of the native substrate. This substrate molecule loses some of the concavity seen with the native substrate, and the DKP nitrogen is no longer within hydrogen bonding distance of the heme propionate group as is seen in the crystal structure with cWP. Nonetheless, the introduced methyl-group is oriented roughly four Angstroms from the heme-iron in a position that would appear primed for oxidation (e.g., hydroxylation followed by spontaneous demethylation) by an activated oxygen species if it was generated. The second substrate molecule, shown in light green, binds very similarly to what was observed in the crystal structure of the native substrate. High-performance liquid chromatography characterization of AspB turnover with N1-methyl cWP revealed that the substrate analog was highly inhibitory and only produced a very minor amount of a demethylated dimerized product with an m over z equals five hundred seventy-nine.

As AspB appears unable to effectively metabolize the N-methylated substrate despite a similar binding mode, we compared the spectral and kinetic characteristics for oxy-AspB decay in the presence of N1-methyl cWP. Dramatically different kinetic behavior was observed, as the oxy-complex decayed directly to a mixture of ferric HS/LS states with a composition that was identical to the resting substrate-bound state with clearly defined isosbestic points for the transition. While the formation of AspB-oxy was significantly faster in the presence of N1-methyl cWP (two hundred thirty-eight per second) with an on rate for oxygen binding roughly three-fold higher than with cWP, the decay kinetics were much slower than cWP and dominated by the amplitude of the slow phase. The rates of both decay phases closely resembled formation of the E-S complex monitored at three hundred ninety nanometers, unlike what was observed with cWP. Thus, alteration of the indole moiety of the substrate reverts AspB to the typical autoxidation behavior characteristic of most CYPs.

Provision of a Second electron Is Not Required for Catalysis. Taken together, the unusual behavior for the decay of the AspB-oxy complex in the presence of cWP as well as the inverse kinetic solvent isotope effect on product formation prompted us to examine the possibility that the generation of CYP-I may not be required for catalysis. The dithionite-reduced E-S complex was exposed to oxygen, and samples were then analyzed for product formation. It is unlikely that excess dithionite would be able to effectively reduce the oxy complex, as CYPs prototypically require an allosteric effector role provided by a biological redox partner for efficient second electron transfer. Nevertheless, we further excluded this possibility through the removal of excess dithionite by anaerobically desalting the E-S complex following reduction such that only one electron equivalent was provided. Irrespective of this chromatographic step, we observed the efficient formation of a product with identical retention time, UV-absorption profile and mass over charge as

Two (Figure S sixteen). The addition of catalase or superoxide dismutase did not significantly affect the accumulation of product in single-turnover experiments, ruling out that product was formed via a H two O two shunt pathway or from the reaction of released superoxide to the ferrous enzyme (Figure four B). Quantitation of the product revealed a highly efficient process, resulting in zero point six eight plus or minus zero point one two molar equivalents of two per enzyme, while zero point one plus or minus zero point zero two equivalents of H two O per enzyme was also produced (Figure four B), accounting for nearly all approximately ninety percentage of the O two and redox equivalents provided during the experiment. We were unable to observe any product in single-turnover experiments when three was used as the substrate, and H two O two quantitation indicated significantly more H two O two was generated, consistent with the autooxidation behavior shown in stopped-flow experiments (Figure S seventeen).

Evidence for HAT by a CYP Ferric Superoxide. To further probe the nature of the Asp B-oxy reaction with the native substrate, we compared the rate of decay of the intermediate under single turnover conditions in stopped-flow experiments in H two O and D two O. As both the DKP and indole N-H protons are exchangeable in solvent, we preincubated the E:S complex in deuterated buffer to achieve deuteration at both sites. We observed a normal solvent kinetic isotope effect K H over K D of two point six plus or minus zero point three (Figure five A, Table S six), in stark contrast to the inverse KSIE observed when using surrogate redox partners. This implies a change in the rate-limiting step under single turnover conditions and strongly implicates the Asp B-oxy species for affecting the N-H(D) cleavage. For comparison, we performed the same experiments with three to determine if a KSIE is observed in autoxidation, since it has been suggested that hydrogen bonding may also play a role in the stability of the oxy complex. However, only minor KSIEs for both phases for autoxidation were observed (K H over K p equals one point three plus or minus zero point two and one point four plus or minus zero point two for the first and second decay phases, respectively) (Table S seven). N-H abstraction by Asp B-oxy would provide a proton and electron to form the ferric hydroperoxo complex. Due to the highly transient nature of this intermediate, which has only been observed in CYPs at cryogenic temperatures using cryoradiolysis and calibrated thermal annealing, we were unsurprisingly unable to observe this species in stopped-flow experiments. However, to examine the role of the subsequent steps involved in downstream dimerization, we replaced the conserved threonine residue at position two hundred forty-four with an alanine, which has been rigorously examined in CYPs to be crucial for maintaining correct protonation of the distal oxygen for efficient O-O bond scission to form CYP-I (Figure five B). CYPs that use a ferric peroxo-anion remain functional when the analogous mutation is made. Compared to wild-type Asp B, the rate of product formation under multiple turnover conditions is thirty-fold slower in T two hundred forty-four alanine (Figure five C). Consistent with its role in proton-mediated heterolysis, the T two hundred forty-four alanine mutant displays less than three percent coupling of NADPH to the product as compared to sixty-two percent in wild-type (Figure five D). Furthermore, we were unable to observe any appreciable product formation in single-turnover assays with T two hundred forty-four alanine Asp B. This suggests a mechanism by which the conserved threonine in CYP-dimerases retains its canonical role for CYP-I formation and is critical in dimerization steps that occur after initial oxidation.

Generalization of a Superoxide-Mechanism to Other CYP DKP Dimerases. Utilizing the enzyme function initiative suite of tools, we compared the I-helix sequences of forty-eight CDPS-associated CYPs (Figure S eighteen). The alcohol residue is highly conserved in these putative CYP-dimerases (typically a serine), while the acid is replaced with aliphatic residues (typically valine or isoleucine). This suggests that ferric superoxide reactivity may not be limited to just Asp B. To test whether the potential commonality of this mechanism to other types of DKP linkages, we evaluated the metabolic profile of Nze B, which shares approximately ninety-eight percent sequence identity to Asp B. Using the surrogate redox system, Nze B was found to convert CWP to a mixture of C-C and C-N-linked dimers as previously reported (Figure six A). To investigate whether C-C bond formation also proceeds via a ferric superoxide complex, we repeated single turnover experiments with NzeB. Provision of one reducing equivalent and O two was sufficient to generate the same ensemble of products as those formed under multiple turnover conditions with surrogate redox partners.


## DISCUSSION

Steady-state analysis of product formation by AspB has revealed a significant inverse kinetic solvent isotope effect, implicating the use of an intermediate prior to CYP one for the initiation of substrate dimerization. The competent formation of aspergilazine A under conditions when a second electron is omitted suggests that only a single reducing equivalent from a

Journal of the American Chemical Society redox partner is needed for catalysis to occur. Further support for the reactive nature of a ferric superoxide complex is provided through examination of the single-turnover KSIE of oxy-AspB decay, which reverts to a normal (i.e., K H over K D greater than one) value due to the suppression of available proton-linked uncoupling pathways.

Unlike analogous species in nonheme mono- and di-iron enzymes, the ferric-superoxide intermediate in CYPs has been largely considered catalytically inert and instead serves as the primary branchpoint between uncoupling via autoxidation and further reduction and proton-mediated O-O heterolysis. One notable exception is the CYP TxtE, which catalyzes the nitration of tryptophan. Transient absorption studies have shown that the ferric superoxide complex of TxtE reacts with nitric oxide gas to form a ferric peroxynitrite intermediate that subsequently undergoes a homolytic cleavage to form compound two and release of an NO two radical. Intriguingly, TxtE is also missing the conserved acid residue, which is replaced with a proline, underscoring the importance in the management of proton delivery in this process. Unlike AspB, the TxtE oxy-species is unreactive toward its substrate tryptophan but requires further "activation" by NO.

The analogous oxy-species is used by the histidine-ligated heme enzyme family (recently designated as heme-dependent aromatic oxygenase) that is historically defined by tryptophan two, three (TDO) and indoleamine two, three-dioxygenases (IDO). TDO and IDO act on a very similar tryptophan substrate, and transient absorption experiments have shown that a ferric superoxide intermediate directly reacts with the substrate through a mechanism involving direct radical addition at the Carbon two position of the indole ring or epoxidation. The heterolytic O-O cleavage then furnishes a transient compound two species and a monooxygenated or epoxide product en route to dioxygenation. Thus, we also considered if AspB may initiate activation of cWP in a similar manner involving a cryptic monooxygenation, but such a mechanism is inconsistent with the normal KSIE for oxy-decay upon substrate N-H deuteration and the inhibitory nature of three.

The apparent reactivity of the AspB-oxy complex contrasts with synthetic heme-superoxo adducts, which are typically considered sluggish oxidants for HAT. The bond dissociation free energy of an indole N-H bond is estimated ninety kilocalories per mole, and the DKP N-H is considerably higher. Numerous reports have demonstrated HAT on relatively weak O-H (BDFE less than or equal to eighty kilocalories per mole) substrates, in accordance with the limited experimental data available of the resultant hydroperoxo species (O-OH BDFE seventy kilocalories per mole). Although the precise electronic origins for enabling HAT by AspB-oxy remain to be elucidated, it is likely that preorganization of the substrate in an optimized geometry is necessary to allow for such a reaction to occur and to thwart unwanted indole oxygenation.

Based on the current findings, we propose a mechanism for AspB dimerization that is shown in Figure seven. The use of ferric-superoxide species as a primary oxidant may serve as a general stratagem to circumvent monooxygenation and forgo the nonproductive (and less controlled) oxidation of a redox-active substrate by compound I. Although the deuteration strategy employed here does not allow for precise assignment of the abstraction site (DKP vs indole N-H), the ferric-superoxide species may not have the sufficient oxidizing potential for abstraction of the DKP N-H group based on its higher bond


## Article

dissociation energy, consistent with the highly inhibitory nature observed upon substrate indole N-methylation. Indole N-H HAT would then be envisioned to furnish a hydroperoxo species, bypassing the need for the I-helix acid residue for primary protonation. As we have shown that the I-helix alcohol residue (T244) is important for functional product formation in AspB, ensuing O-O heterolysis likely occurs to give rise to compound I and provide an additional oxidizing species for the downstream secondary activation required for subsequent dimerization. HAT by compound I would yield compound II, which would then need to auto-decay to regenerate the ferric water-bound resting state.

Our findings highlight a unique strategy that CYPs can use for selective diversification of natural products through Carbon-Carbon and Carbon-Nitrogen bond formation. This discovery not only expands the scope of CYP reactivity but may also prove valuable in leveraging these enzymes for chemoenzymatic DKP assembly. As both AspB and NzeB bypass the need for a second electron transfer step provided by a redox donor, more efficient turnover methods (e.g., light- or electrode-driven catalysis) can be envisioned to form high yields of these unique bioactive natural products.


## ASSOCIATED CONTENT

Supporting Information

Detailed experimental procedures and kinetic fitting parameters, Figures S1-S20 and Tables S1-S7.

The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.