## Quantum skyrmion lattices in Heisenberg ferromagnets

Skyrmions are topological magnetic textures that can arise in noncentrosymmetric ferromagnetic materials. In most systems experimentally investigated to date, skyrmions emerge as classical objects. However, the discovery of skyrmions with nanometer length scales has sparked interest in their quantum properties. Here, we simulate the ground states of two-dimensional spin-one-half Heisenberg lattices with Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions and discover a broad region in the zero-temperature phase diagram which hosts quantum skyrmion lattices. We argue that the quantum skyrmion lattice phase can be detected experimentally in the magnetization profile via local magnetic polarization measurements as well as in the spin structure factor measurable via neutron scattering experiments. Finally, we explore the resulting quantum skyrmion state, analyze its real-space polarization profile and show that it is a nonclassical state featuring entanglement between quasiparticle and environment mainly localized near the boundary spins of the skyrmion.


## I. INTRODUCTION

Magnetic skyrmions are vortexlike quasiparticles characterized by a nontrivial topological invariant in real space. These states are typically found in noncentrosymmetric ferromagnets in a certain range of external magnetic field and temperature, and are stabilized by an antisymmetric spin exchange energy, termed Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction. After their first detection in a magnetic system by a neutron diffraction experiment in two thousand nine, and a full tomography by electron microscopy in two thousand ten, intense follow-up studies revealed intriguing dynamical properties, rendering skyrmions potentially useful for memory and computing devices. Usually, the skyrmions encountered in these systems arise from thermal fluctuations and extend over length scales that are much larger than the interatomic distance and thus behave like classical objects. Other possibilities to create skyrmions are through suitable direct current devices, such as those proposed in references. However, smaller skyrmions do exist and have already created interest in possible quantum properties of skyrmions. Several works have predicted the quantum behavior of skyrmions by using classical magnetic textures as a starting point and studying quantum corrections in the semiclassical ferromagnetic regime.

Beyond this semiclassical limit, some works have indicated that quantum analogs of classical skyrmions might exist in spin systems. The authors of reference used a multiscale approach to demonstrate that mesoscopic magnetization vortices are stabilized by quantum fluctuations, which suggests the possibility of inherently quantum-mechanical counterparts of these states at zero temperature. So far, attempts to classify skyrmion excitations with sizes comparable to the interatomic spacing have been made in frustrated quantum lattice systems and ferromagnetic lattices with DMI. Several geometries have been studied to understand the quantum analogs of classical skyrmions, and quantitative results have been obtained by numerical diagonalization of the Hamiltonian. Since the dimension of the quantum Hamiltonian scales exponentially with the number of lattice sites, such exact diagonalization strategies are limited to small system sizes containing at most approximately thirty spin-one-half sites without exploiting symmetries. Although DMI interactions are among the most popular to investigate the formation of classical skyrmion phases, their quantum analogs are analytically hard to handle and quantitative results beyond system sizes amenable for exact diagonalization are still lacking. As an alternative route to quantum skyrmions that avoids DMI, frustrated spin lattice systems were studied in reference. Using exact diagonalization for small systems and analytical spin-wave theory, the authors identified skyrmions with magnon bound states and developed a phenomenological theory based on a trial wave function.

Here, we use the density matrix renormalization group algorithm to explore ferromagnetic phases of quantum spin-one-half Heisenberg models with DMI and uniaxial anisotropy. As our main result, we discover a zero-temperature quantum phase with a nontrivial magnetic spin texture that signals an emergent quantum skyrmion lattice. This phase was previously overlooked because it appears only beyond a critical system size which for realistic parameters is larger than the system sizes amenable to exact diagonalization. We identify three ferromagnetic phases that can be directly observed and distinguished in the space-resolved magnetization profile. Furthermore, we argue that the polarization gives access to the zero-temperature phase diagram of the model under investigation. Contrary to similar quasiparticles found in frustrated lattices or quantum skyrmions embedded in a classical magnet, we show that the skyrmion lattice phase reported here emerges from entangled spin-one-half pairs, which bear witness to a genuine quantum mechanical origin without classical analog, a feature that may pave the way toward a microscopic description of skyrmion qubits used for realizing quantum logic elements based on nanoscale devices.


## II. MODEL

We study the zero-temperature phase diagram of a quantum spin-one-half Heisenberg model with DMI and external magnetic field. The Hamiltonian reads:

H equals one-half sum over all nearest-neighbor r and r prime of J multiplied by S sub r dot S sub r prime plus D sub r prime minus r dot the cross product of S sub r and S sub r prime plus sum over r of B dot S sub r,

where S sub r equals h-bar sigma sub r divided by two, with Pauli matrices sigma sub alpha r for alpha in the set x, y, z, denotes a spin-one-half operator at position r. J is less than zero is the ferromagnetic exchange coupling strength, D sub r prime minus r, is the DMI vector, and B equals B e sub z denotes the applied magnetic field along the z axis. The notation brackets r, r prime implies a sum over all pairs of nearest-neighbor lattice sites. In Section six, we will also consider the impact of a uniaxial magnetic anisotropy with strength

K, H sub K equals one-half sum over all nearest-neighbor r and r prime K S sub r z S sub r z.

We solve the above Hamiltonian numerically by means of matrix product state simulations on different two-dimensional Bravais lattices with open boundary conditions consisting of lattice sites R equals the sum of N sub I A sub I spanned by basis vectors A sub one point two with A sub Z comma I equals zero. For details on the implementation and on the two-dimensional to one-dimensional mapping required for using matrix product states, we refer to the Appendix. The D M I vectors read

D sub R minus R equals D times E sub Z cross R prime minus R.

with a positive D M I vector amplitude D greater than zero. For triangular and square lattices, we depicted the orientation of the D M I vectors in Figure one.

We apply the external magnetic field B parallel to the lattice plane normal E sub Z. Without loss of generality, we assume negative values B less than zero such that field-polarized spins are eigenstates of S sub R superscript Z with eigenvalue plus one-half and therefore align with the plane normal. For convenience, we will express interatomic distances in units of the lattice constants A sub I equals absolute value of A sub I and energies in units of D, with hbar equals one.

The Hamiltonian one may be seen as the quantum counterpart of typical classical spin models which give rise to magnetic skyrmions. In this work, we discuss the emergence of quantum skyrmions and quantum skyrmion lattices in two-dimensional triangular and square lattices at zero temperature and with different open boundary shapes.


## Three. Individual Quantum Skyrmions

For small system diameters L less than or approximately five A, the exact eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the full Hamiltonian can be computed numerically, for instance by the Lanczos or Arnoldi algorithms, and we first cross-checked our own exact diagonalization codes by reproducing the results of previous research. To ensure the correctness of our findings, we further compared expectation values computed from the matrix product states obtained by D M R G with exact diagonalization results for all system sizes amenable for exact diagonalization and found quantitative agreement up to a self-imposed accuracy delta. We thereby checked that finite-size ground states of the spin one-half Hamiltonian can be approximated faithfully with matrix product states. In fact, the reliability of D M R G for two-dimensional spin one-half quantum Heisenberg models has already been demonstrated in numerous works, with a strong bias toward frustrated antiferromagnets and spin liquids, which are prime examples of the most demanding systems to simulate numerically due to the presence of topological order and long-range entanglement. In this work, we focus on the computationally less demanding scenario of magnetically ordered phases hosting skyrmions and field-polarized states in the ferromagnetic regime

J is less than zero. Beyond a critical system diameter of L approximately eight A, we find values of D and B for which the ground state of the Hamiltonian H hosts skyrmion-like spin textures confined in the interior (bulk) of the lattice, which we display in Fig. two. We checked that these skyrmion wave functions correspond to approximate eigenstates of the Hamiltonian by computing the energy variance E and performed a linear extrapolation toward results without numerical errors (see Appendix A for a discussion).

We compute the components of the spin magnetization, which are local expectation values M sub R equals the expectation value of S sub R. Since M sub Z R is parallel to the external field, we call this magnetization component the polarization. For B approximately J equals negative D divided by two, the local spin profiles yield magnetization textures similar to those obtained for classical skyrmion configurations of the Néel hedgehog type: the central spin is polarized opposite to the applied magnetic field, and the spins wind radially from the center toward the periphery. In Fig. two, we depict the polarization along the field M sub Z R using a color scale and the in-plane magnetization M sub chi divided by Y R by arrows. More detailed radial and angular distributions of panel Fig. two e are depicted in Fig. three. In Fig. four, we show that the average polarization M bar Z equals one divided by N sum over R M sub Z R, as a function of the external field, yields three disconnected regions uniquely associated with the three phases of Eq. one.

We estimate the size of an individual quantum skyrmion as the number of lattice sites over which the polarization changes its orientation once and the components orthogonal to the external field vanish. The radius can then be read out from Figs. two and three and results in R sub zero approximately three A for J equals negative zero point five D and K equals zero. These quantum skyrmion S K ground states occur not only for the fine-tuned parameters presented in Fig. two but in a wide range of intermediate values of the magnetic field. Furthermore, the emergence of individual skyrmions for small lattices is largely independent of the lattice geometry. While the effect of boundaries cannot be neglected for the small systems considered here, we verified that the size of an individual skyrmion is neither affected by the boundary conditions (see Fig. two) nor the system diameter (see Fig. eight).

As we show in Fig. two, for small magnetic fields, the system's ground state is a helical spin spiral H S state. This is characterized by a degenerate ground state, in which each possible ground state features oscillations of the magnetization along a symmetry axis of the lattice. The large ground-state degeneracy makes the spin spiral phase notoriously difficult to simulate for tensor network states. In contrast, for large magnetic fields, the system reaches a ferromagnetic state, where all spins are polarized parallel to the external magnetic field. The bulk of the field-polarized ferromagnet is devoid of entanglement and can thus be most efficiently approximated by an M P S. For parameters that result in S K ground states, D M R G reliably converges within a few dozen sweeps and yields excellent M P S approximations with maximum truncation error Delta rho approximately ten to the negative six, even for small bond dimensions

M equals thirty-two left twenty-six. We want to stress that the fine-tuned regime J equals negative zero point five D is not necessary to enter the skyrmion lattice phase. By increasing the ferromagnetic exchange coupling to a value J equals negative two D, we obtain qualitatively similar results, which we present in Fig. four. Note, however, that the corresponding system diameter for J equals negative two D is dramatically increased compared to J equals negative zero point five D. We attribute this to the fact that the skyrmion radius is determined by the ratio


## Four. Entanglement

To probe whether the spins of a skyrmion are entangled, a genuine quantum feature of many-body systems, we compute the entanglement entropy of a suitable bipartition of the system. The latter is defined as S sub v N equals negative trace of rho sub A ln rho sub A, which can be understood as the von Neumann entropy of the reduced density matrix rho sub A equals trace sub B of rho sub A B, obtained by splitting the set of lattice sites N into two disjoint sets A and B, and performing the partial trace over subsystem B. For our purposes, it is sufficient to fix A and B as two patches that are symmetric about the central site (see Appendix B). We denote the entropy associated with this symmetric center-site partition choice as S, which is plotted in color in Fig. four and Fig. nine, panels c and d.

MPS are constructed to target states of small entropy by truncating the reduced density matrix to a dimension dim left parenthesis rho sub A right parenthesis is less than or equal to M, which yields an upper bound for the entanglement entropy of an MPS state, widetilde S equals ln M, a quantity on the order of one to ten for typical simulations. The bulk of FP states can be approximated by product states of sin negative one-half particles aligned to the axis of the magnetic field, and for those states, one finds S approximates zero up to small finite-size corrections. In contrast, for systems hosting a single quantum skyrmion, we obtain values for the entanglement entropy in the range zero point two is less than S is less than zero point seven, which demonstrates the presence of significant entanglement in the spin negative one-half quantum skyrmion and indicates that they cannot be expressed as a classical product state. Finally, in the HS phase, we find the strongest entanglement left parenthesis zero point seven is less than S right parenthesis. While we focus mainly on skyrmions with ferromagnetic exchange interaction left parenthesis J is less than zero, right parenthesis we find strong signatures of skyrmions and skyrmion lattices for antiferromagnetic exchange left parenthesis J is greater than zero right parenthesis as well. However, this phase differs from the ferromagnetic skyrmions and skyrmion lattices, most apparently in the entanglement, which is significantly larger. We postpone a detailed investigation of quantum skyrmions and skyrmion lattices for antiferromagnetic exchange couplings to future work.

The von Neumann entropy targets quantum correlations between a bipartition of the system but does not provide local information about the entanglement between individual spin one-half pairs. To access the spatial distribution of entanglement, it is therefore more convenient to calculate the concurrence C sub r sub one r sub two, defined for two lattice sites at positions r sub one and r sub two. For a generic state it can be expressed through the root of the spectrum of the non-Hermitian matrix R sub r sub one r sub two equals rho sub r sub one r sub two widetilde rho sub r sub one r sub two, where rho sub r sub one r sub two equalsmathrm tr sub r notin left bracket r sub one, r sub two right bracket left parenthesis rho right parenthesis is the reduced density matrix of the two sites r sub one and r sub two, and widetilde rho sub r sub one r sub two equals left parenthesis sigma sub y otimes sigma sub y right parenthesis rho sub r sub one r sub two sup asterisk left parenthesis sigma sub y otimes sigma sub y right parenthesis is a rotation of this reduced density matrix. The concurrence is constructed from the square roots lambda sub i (ordered in decreasing order) of the eigenvalues of

R, C sub r sub one r sub two equals max left curly bracket zero, lambda sub one minus lambda sub two minus lambda sub three minus lambda sub four right curly bracket. Four.

It is related to the entanglement of formation: for separable states C vanishes, and it increases monotonically toward the limit C equals one for two maximally entangled spin-one-half's. Using the concurrence, we obtain the space-resolved entanglement distribution between spin pairs in the different phases and present its qualitative distribution by green links in Fig. five. For a more quantitative analysis, we differentiate between

B equals negative three D divided by four. concurrences of different ranges up to third-nearest neighbor in Table I.

For HS states, we find the largest concurrences up to C sub HS equals zero point one six. Therefore, we use C sub HS as a measure of reference to quantify the entanglement of the remaining ordered states. For the FP states (large magnetic field), we find almost vanishing entanglement in the bulk, indicating that the bulk spins are separable. Small nonzero values of C approximately zero point three five C sub HS occur at the boundary due to the finite system size and strong DMI. Finally, for the quantum SK states (intermediate magnetic field), we find that the spins inside the skyrmion quasiparticle are only weakly entangled, but we find concurrences C approximately zero point eight C sub HS at the outer rim spins of the skyrmion, signaling significant entanglement of the quantum skyrmion with the field-polarized environment. Interestingly, both the helical state and quantum skyrmion show long-range concurrences between distant spin pairs beyond next-to-nearest neighbors.


## V. STRUCTURE FACTOR AND NEUTRON SCATTERING CROSS SECTION

We compute the Fourier components of the spin-spin correlation function as follows,

S sub alpha beta left parenthesis q right parenthesis equals sum sub r r prime e raised to i q dot left parenthesis r prime minus r right parenthesis expected value of S sub alpha comma r hat S sub beta comma r prime hat right parenthesis,

where alpha comma beta element of left brace x comma y comma z right brace, q equals left parenthesis q sub x comma q sub y comma q sub z right parenthesis a wave vector which is later associated with the scattering vector, and the expectation values of the product of spin operators are evaluated with the ground state obtained by the MPS simulations of small hexagon flakes. From S sub alpha beta, the elastic magnetic neutron scattering cross section d sigma divided by d Omega at momentum transfer vector q is given by:

d sigma divided by d Omega left parenthesis q right parenthesis is proportional to sum sub alpha beta left parenthesis delta sub alpha beta minus q hat sub alpha q hat sub beta right parenthesis S sub alpha beta left parenthesis q right parenthesis,

where q hat equals q divided by q equals left parenthesis q hat sub x comma q hat sub y comma q hat sub z right parenthesis. Concerning experiments, we emphasize that d sigma divided by d Omega corresponds to a scattering geometry where the externally applied magnetic field B equals B e hat sub z is parallel to the wave vector of the incoming neutron beam, and where the detector plane is spanned by the two components q sub x and q sub one of the scattering vector. In the limit of the small-angle approximation, one can assume q sub z equals zero. In Fig. seven we display d sigma divided by d Omega for the helical, skyrmion, and field-polarized states (see Fig. six for all components S sub alpha beta of the structure factor). The geometry and local polarization of those states is displayed in Figs. two(d)-two(f). Generally speaking, long-range magnetic ordering is signaled by the presence of Bragg peaks in d sigma divided by d Omega at momentum transfers q corresponding to the wave vectors of the ordering. We expect additional diffuse magnetic scattering components in d sigma divided by d Omega rooted in spatial variations of the spin orientation.

As expected, the cross section of the FP state in Figure seven C is isotropic and exhibits a single broad peak centered at Q equals zero mainly caused by the component S sub Z Z parallel to the external field. The contributions in S sub alpha beta left-brace X comma Y right-brace comma left-brace beta in left-brace X comma Y comma Z right-brace right-parenthesis are attributed to finite-size effects, caused by a helical winding of angle bracket S sub R angle bracket near the boundaries due to the strong DMI interaction (see Figure two). The azimuthal average of the cross section in Figure seven C, defined as left-parenthesis two pi right-parenthesis to the power of negative one integral from zero to two pi D phi left-parenthesis D sigma over D omega right-parenthesis can be well described by the form factor of a uniformly polarized thin circular disk with a radius R corresponding to the cluster radius, i.e., D sigma over D omega left-parenthesis Q right-parenthesis proportional to left-bracket two J sub one left-parenthesis Q R right-parenthesis over left-parenthesis Q R right-parenthesis right-bracket squared , where J sub one left-parenthesis Z right-parenthesis the first-order Bessel function. To highlight this play the first two minima of left-bracket J sub one left-parenthesis Q R right-parenthesis over left-parenthesis Q R right-parenthesis right-bracket squared for R equals four A by dotted white lines in Figure seven C and find a very good agreement to the numerical data of the discrete system. The HS state in Figure seven A is characterized by a superposition of spin spirals with wave vectors Q not equal to zero, resulting in six pronounced Bragg peaks in S sub Z Z left-parenthesis Q right-parenthesis period. We observe in the SK phase a superposition of the two extreme limits: In particular, we find a Bragg peak at Q equals zero, together with an off-diagonal Bragg ring caused by the radial polarization winding of the skyrmion [see Figure seven B]. The radius of the skyrmion can be as R sub zero equals Q sub zero to the power negative one approximately three A with Q sub zero approximately equal to one over left-parenthesis three A right-parenthesis the momentum Q not equal to zero ring, consistent with the estimate given in Figure three. Hence, the predicted quantum skyrmion profile yields a distinct signature in the measurable neutron scattering cross section and allows a determination of its size. We want to stress that a classical spin profile compatible to the normalized quantum mechanical expectation values can lead to a cross section in qualitative agreement with the ones reported here. However, quantitative deviations are expected because, for classical systems, the spin-spin correlation functions factorize since the zero temperature configuration is nondegenerate for B equals zero. Therefore, a direct measurement of the connected spin-spin correlation function left-parenthesis a comma R O beta comma R right-parenthesis minus left-parenthesis a comma R right-parenthesis left-parenthesis O beta comma R right-parenthesis will differentiate classical from quantum skyrmion states at zero temperature. Classical and quantum states also differ locally in the spin norm, which is not necessarily conserved in general | S sub R | less than or equal to one-half. We find that the domain wall spin norm at the outer rim of the skyrmion, where the concurrence is large, is about four percent lower compared to the field-polarized environment.


## Six. QUANTUM SKYRMION LATTICE PHASE

After having discussed the properties of individual quantum skyrmions in the preceding paragraphs, we now turn to the phase diagram of the system. Our numerical technique makes it possible to reach system sizes much larger than that of individual skyrmions, which in principle allows us to extrapolate toward a phase diagram in the thermodynamic limit. While the HS and the FP phase remain unchanged when increasing the system size, at intermediate magnetic fields, the ground state for large lattices features a regular lattice of quantum skyrmions, labeled S K X. Similarly to their classical analogs, the individual skyrmions form a dense packing, and for larger system sizes, we thus find quantum skyrmion chains and lattices, for which we plot examples in Figure eight.

We elucidate the appearance and robustness of quantum skyrmion lattices as a function of the external magnetic field, the strength of DMI, and perturbations of the form equation two due to uniaxial anisotropy. For this calculation, we have concentrated on a triangular lattice with disk boundary conditions of diameter L equals nine sites, for which we obtain a single centered skyrmion for B equals J equals negative zero point five D in the unperturbed case K equals zero. We relax the fine-tuned parameter lines of figure two by variations of B, J, and consider nonzero uniaxial anisotropies for J less than zero by varying K.

Based on our simulations, we predict the existence of at least three distinct quantum phases of our model: one, a region hosting HS states for weak field amplitudes, two, a valley for field strengths of the order of B approximately negative zero point five D, which features a lattice formed by quantum skyrmions of radius r approximately three a, SKX3a, and three, an FP phase where spins align parallel to the external field.

Helical spin spiral states are characterized by a vanishing average polarization m squared, whereas field-polarized states are maximally polarized, up to finite-size effects. As shown in figure two, quantum skyrmions are embedded in a background of field-polarized spins, and as a consequence, the state in the skyrmion lattice phase will have a finite polarization smaller than a corresponding field-polarized state. We numerically confirm this intuitive picture and find disjoint intervals of average polarization m z uniquely linked to each phase, which can be summarized in the zero-temperature phase diagram presented in figure nine. Note that figure nine is obtained by simulations of a fixed flake system size and is therefore only qualitatively correct in the thermodynamic limit. Furthermore, the interplay between system size and skyrmion length scale might lead to incommensurate phases which will be the subject of future work. In order to determine the exact position of quantum critical points or the nature of the quantum phase transition, a finite size extrapolation is necessary, a study which we leave for future work.

Our results about the dependence of the skyrmion phase on the uniaxial anisotropy are in qualitative agreement with corresponding classical systems, where it is known that a weak uniaxial anisotropy tends to stabilize skyrmion configurations at smaller magnetic fields. Furthermore, we observe that the skyrmion radius increases with negative J over D, such that quite large spin-half systems might be needed to resolve even individual quantum skyrmions. Based on our results for J equals negative zero point five D we conjecture that the skyrmion lattice phase should also exist for such cases where the individual quasiparticles have a larger radius, but due to limitations dictated by the numerical complexity, which we discuss in Appendix A, other numerical techniques must be consulted to make quantitative predictions about the phase diagram for negative J over D much greater than zero point five. Similar values of the exchange coupling are expected in present thin film experiments, thereby making our results of practical relevance.

Besides the ferromagnetic SKX3a phase, which is the focus of this work, we find signatures of a quantum skyrmion lattice phase in the absence of exchange coupling and even for antiferromagnetic couplings J less than or equal to zero. However, because of the significantly enhanced entanglement, the MPS ansatz for this phase requires an exponential scaling of the bond dimension with the system size, and


## QUANTUM SKYRMION LATTICES IN HEISENBERG ...

therefore simulations of large clusters are out of reach for DMRG.


## Seven. Summary

We have demonstrated that the ground state of the two-dimensional ferromagnetic spin-half Heisenberg model in the presence of DMI hosts quantum skyrmions at intermediate magnetic fields B approximately J equals negative D over two. The resulting magnetic textures are characterized by a central spin pointing opposite to the direction of the applied magnetic field and winds radially outwards toward the field-polarized environment, similar to a classical Néel skyrmion. For periodic boundary conditions and in the thermodynamic limit, we expect the ground state of the skyrmion lattice phase to be degenerate, scaling with the area of the individual skyrmion quasiparticles, such that the bulk of a system with open boundary conditions corresponds to a spontaneously symmetry broken state. The existence of quantum skyrmions yields experimental signatures in the position-dependent magnetization, the average polarization, and the structure factor, and we showed that these observables allow a distinction between a spin spiral phase at small magnetic fields, a skyrmion phase at intermediate magnetic fields, and a field-polarized phase at large magnetic fields.

While the spin texture is reminiscent of classical skyrmions, we should point out that in the present case, the skyrmion phase arises as a quantum ground state at zero temperature with open boundary conditions. In contrast, classical skyrmions typically occur at finite temperatures and result from a minimization of the free energy. Moreover, our examination of the resulting quantum state using the entanglement entropy and the concurrence has revealed that the quantum skyrmion state features significant entanglement shared between spin pairs of the skyrmion boundary. We argued that the quantum and classical states can be distinguished by the norm of the polarization S r less than or equal to one half, conserved for classical states, and by corrected correlation functions, vanishing for classical states. We therefore conclude that a semiclassical treatment of the quantum skyrmion based on a classical magnetic texture would not necessarily capture the internal degrees of freedom of a quantum skyrmion.

Towards larger system sizes, we found that the quantum skyrmion phase is characterized by a regular lattice of skyrmions. As the size of individual skyrmions is determined by the system parameters B, J, D, and K, a regular lattice requires commensurability between the lattice size and the skyrmion size. While our numerical simulations cannot reach the limit of infinite system size, our results allow us to extrapolate that the ground state in the thermodynamic limit features a dense packing of quantum skyrmion textures. Each of these quantum skyrmions has entanglement localized near its domain wall, but the entanglement between different skyrmions is small, which suggests that they can be approximated as individual quasiparticles.

We expect that our results may guide the development of an effective analytical field theory of the quantum skyrmion phase. Based on our experience, we conclude that variational tensor networks provide a suitable numerical technique to study these systems. This is not surprising for gapped quantum phases with short-range interactions and bounded entanglement. Nevertheless, using MPS for a two-dimensional system is not without pitfalls, as the necessary mapping on a one-dimensional system causes non-local interactions. We have made sure that our results have fully converged for lattice sizes corresponding to individual skyrmions. However, we have seen that the numerical errors grow for the system sizes required for four by four skyrmion lattices, twenty-nine by twenty-nine spin-half in total. For such large systems, we expect our results to be only qualitatively correct.

Regarding alternative numerical schemes, we have verified that our MPS results agree quantitatively with all available results from exact diagonalization. We have also compared our results to variational methods based on neural-network quantum states. However, we found significant deviations between the exact result and neural-network states even for small system sizes, and the error was already on the order of ten percent for the energy eigenvalues. This suggests that neural-network states may not provide an efficient variational ansatz for mesoscopic spin systems with DMI. We expect that quantum Monte-Carlo simulations might be useful to go to larger system sizes. However, the inclusion of DMI together with an external magnetic field brings about a sign problem that hinders convergence. Other promising tensor network states for two D spin systems with DMI are variational tree tensor network states and projected entangled pair states (PEPS). We expect finite PEPS to outperform MPS for larger spin-one half systems hosting skyrmion lattices, especially since recently a more efficient gradient-based optimization has been developed based on automatic differentiation techniques.


## APPENDIX A: MATRIX PRODUCT STATES

Tensor networks provide an important numerical toolbox in computational physics and have been applied successfully to countless interacting and strongly correlated systems. One of the most established algorithms, called DMRG, is understood as a sequential variational optimization of adjacent MPS tensors until convergence is reached. Our DMRG simulations are mainly based on the Julia package ITensors, and we made available a condensed version, reproducing Fig. two (e), on GitHub. Additionally, we cross-checked ITensor with TeNPy simulations, and upload the condensed version for the TeNPy framework alongside the julia implementation.

A generic state consisting of N spin-one half sites reads

W

I T A (in) ) li one, i two, ... , I N) , (A one)

One four) =

where {li k)} forms a canonical basis of the Hilbert space at site k out of N sites in total. For a finite system with Dirichlet boundary conditions, the objects A(in) are matrices, except for the two boundary vectors A(one) and A N) N, such that the result of the product is a scalar. The dimension of the matrices M equals maxn dim (A(in)) is called the bond dimension. If M is fixed to an arbitrary integer, then the MPS representation of quantum states can be used as a variational ansatz to approximate the minimum energy eigenstate. The quality of this approximation is controlled by M. This is particularly transparent in the so-called Schmidt decomposition |$) equals Li minus one Si IVA,i) IVB,i) in which A and B denotes an arbitrary bipartition of the system and |Va,i) E Ha forms a complete basis in the Hilbert space of the part and {A, B}. The Schmidt values si are the roots of the eigenvalues of the reduced density matrix, and therefore related to the von Neumann entanglement entropy S equals minus X4 minus one |si squared ln(|si squared). Consider a truncation M is less than M, then states with a small weight in the reduced density matrix are neglected, and the overlap between the original state with bond dimension M is reduced.

Similarly to quantum states having an MPS representation, quantum operators have a matrix product operator (MPO) representation. Let ME be the bond dimension of the Hamiltonian MPO, then the standard DMRG algorithm bears a leading numerical complexity of O(M cubed MH) (assuming that MH is less than M squared).

For generic many-body states rewritten as MPS, M is an extensive quantity in the number of sites and diverges in the thermodynamic limit. If the target state of a one-dimensional system obeys an area law of the quantum entanglement, then the von Neumann entropy is guaranteed to be a finite constant. Consequentially, M remains finite in the thermodynamic limit, and MPS becomes exact, which explains the success of DMRG applied to one-dimensional quantum systems. Despite its limitations in two dimensions, DMRG is frequently applied to ladder systems and can even yield reliable results for strongly correlated lattices, especially in the case of


## QUANTUM SKYRMION LATTICES IN HEISENBERG ...

quantum spin-one half Heisenberg models. We expect MPS to reliably capture the physics of the quantum skyrmion lattice phase because the external field polarizes the environment, and the resulting states carry no entanglement in the paramagnetic regions, but localized entanglement around the domain wall of the skyrmion.

We typically start with random MPS initial states of bond dimensions up to M less than or equal to one zero two four, followed by sequential variational optimizations ("sweeping") of two adjacent tensors (two-site DMRG). The two-site DMRG allows us to estimate the truncation error Delta rho equals summation from i equals M plus one to infinity s sub i squared, which we use in Fig. ten to extrapolate toward results without numerical errors. To ensure that we display converged results only, we carefully monitor local spin expectation values and stop the simulation if changes in the observables become smaller than delta equals one zero to the power of negative ten. Since we use DMRG in two spatial dimensions, convergence to a spin spiral state may require many sweeps, on the order of one hundred to one thousand. The quality of the approximate ground state with energy E (M) equals the inner product of psi (M) with H psi (M) can be estimated by the energy variance epsilon of M equals the inner product of psi of M with operator H minus E of M squared with psi of M.

By construction, epsilon equals zero for exact eigenstates of the Hamiltonian. Since MPS approximates the wave function with a finite bond dimension M, we have epsilon of M greater than zero and the limit as M approaches infinity epsilon of M equals zero in general. Similarly, the limit as M approaches infinity E of M equals E subscript zero converges to the true eigenstate energy. To estimate the numerical error of our approximate wave functions, we perform linear extrapolations of the energy scaled against the truncation error and the energy variance. The outcomes of this extrapolation are presented in Fig. ten and Table two. We want to stress that the MPS approximations corresponding to skyrmion and field-polarized states easily reach convergence within a few dozen sweeps and follow the expected linear trend in the approximation errors Delta rho and ampersand.

Changes in the local spin expectation values beyond M equals one hundred twenty-eight are invisible to the naked eye when displayed on the scales used in the main text such that a detailed error extrapolation is not needed. A word of caution is due in the case of helical spin spiral states: as we already explained in the main text, these states are difficult to simulate using MPS due to the large degeneracy of the ground-state manifold. This leads to some issues in reaching convergence (up to one thousand sweeps are needed) which for too small bond dimensions may even cause DMRG to get stuck in local energy minima corresponding to excited eigenstates. In the helical phase and for large lattices, MPS is thus not always reliably converging to approximations of the global ground state but converges under some circumstances to low-lying excited states with less entanglement.

Before we can apply DMRG to the system at hand, the two-dimensional lattice must be mapped to a one-dimensional chain. The map from a two-dimensional lattice to a one-dimensional chain can be performed by a sequential numbering of the lattice nodes with major ordering along an arbitrary axis (zigzag order). We choose the major axis to be a subscript two. This can be achieved by f of r of n subscript one, n subscript two equals n subscript two plus the sum n less than n subscript one of l of n where one of n is an auxiliary function that encodes the lattice open boundary conditions and r of n subscript one, n subscript two equals the sum of i n subscript i a subscript i. As a result, the lattice Hamiltonian H hat equals the sum of the inner product of H hat subscript r, r prime plus the sum of r H subscript r a chain Hamiltonian H hat equals the sum of r H subscript r mapped Io the sum of the inner product of H hat subscript f of r, f of r prime plus the sum of r H hat subscript f of r. To simplify the remaining discussion, we now assume square or rhomboid boundary conditions (see Fig. twelve), and one less than n subscript i less than L subscript i, such that l of n equals L subscript two. On-site contributions remain local, nearest-neighbor interactions along the major axis remain short ranged, but the interactions along the a subscript one axis now have an extended range absolute value of f of r minus f of r plus or minus a subscript one equals L subscript two. This results in a growth of the dimension of the Hamiltonian matrix product operator M subscript H proportional to L subscript two. To obtain reasonable computation times for large skyrmion lattice systems, one must therefore restrict the bond dimension M to significantly smaller values. For the largest quantum skyrmion lattice system we present in Fig. eight, we plot the converged results of M equals one hundred twenty-eight. Note that the choice of our mapping preserves the locality of the interaction in one direction. In an attempt to remove this bias, we checked the resulting MPS quality for a different mapping, starting at the central spin-one half site and ordered radially outward (spiral ordering). Using the spiral ordering, we can confirm using the von Neumann entropy that the outer rim of the skyrmion is strongly entangled with its environment, a conclusion we had also reached based on the concurrence.

Compared to the other proposition, the spiral mapping results in higher variational energy, likely the result of the inhomogeneous entanglement distribution. Since entanglement can be created by nonlocal transformations, it is known that certain mappings from two-D to one-D are beneficial compared to others, which can be utilized to obtain a substantial improvement of the overall simulation quality. For the results presented in the main text, we consistently use the zigzag order. The phase diagram presented is entirely unaffected by this choice.

A basic understanding of the classical low-energy configurations can be achieved by performing a variational minimization of the energy functional. In particular, we want to solve for the minimum energy spin configuration which satisfies

Emin equals open curly brace S semicolon Vi equals one, and so on up to N close curly brace minimum E open parenthesis S one, S two, and so on, S N close parenthesis in which E is the classical energy functional

E equals equals two greater than open bracket J S period SP plus D r-r period open parenthesis S comma x SP close parenthesis close bracket plus greater than B period S comma open parenthesis r comma r close parenthesis sharing the same notational conventions with the quantum Hamiltonian, except the use of classical spins. We implemented a standard variational optimization with the Optim julia package, which is included in our repository. All variational techniques are prone to being trapped in local minima, which sensibly depends on the initial state. To be sure that for small sixty-one-spin flakes we obtain samples of a global minimum energy configuration, we performed the variational optimization with one thousand different initial states where the azimuth and polar angles are sampled with a uniform distribution. The low energy results of the classical setup are obtained analogously to the quantum case: We analyze the lowest energy configurations as a response to a changing external Zeeman field, for which we fix the norm of the classical spins to one-half. We present a condensed version of the classical low energy results.

We find that the spectral energy and magnetization lines of the different configurations as a function of B over modulus D are continuous over a wide range of parameters in the phase diagram. In particular, the spectral lines show crossings, which we identify with a phase transition: the first excited states become ground states and vice versa, causing the sudden jumps in the magnetization. This simple analysis suggests first-order Zeeman field induced phase transitions in this model, which are conjectured to be present in the quantum case as well.

If we compare the ranges of the skyrmion phase between quantum and classical, then we note that the quantum


## QUANTUM SKYRMION LATTICES IN HEISENBERG ...

skyrmions are ground states in the regions of the classical field polarized states, which is in agreement with the results presented, namely that quantum fluctuations stabilize skyrmion textures.

zero four three one one three dash twelve