## Structural and Mechanistic Insights into Methane Oxidation by Particulate Methane Monooxygenase

ABSTRACT

Particulate methane monooxygenase is an integral membrane copper-containing enzyme that converts methane to methanol. Knowledge of how particulate methane monooxygenase selectively oxidizes methane under ambient conditions could impact the development of new catalysts. The crystal structure of Methylococcus capsulatus particulate methane monooxygenase reveals the composition and location of three metal centers. Spectroscopic data provide insight into the coordination environments and oxidation states of these metal centers. These results, combined with computational studies and comparisons to relevant systems, are discussed in the context of identifying the most likely site for oxygen activation.


## Introduction

The oxidation of methane to methanol is a challenging reaction because methane is the most inert hydrocarbon (one hundred four kilocalories per mole C-H bond) and because methanol reacts further at high temperatures. In nature, methanotrophic bacteria oxidize methane to methanol in the first step of their metabolic pathway. Methane hydroxylation is carried out at ambient temperature by methane monooxygenase enzymes. There are two forms of methane monooxygenase enzymes. All methanotrophs except members of the Methylocella genus produce an integral membrane methane monooxygenase called particulate methane monooxygenase. Several strains also express a cytoplasmic form called soluble methane monooxygenase. In organisms that possess both forms, including Methylococcus capsulatus and Methylosinus trichosporium, differential expression is regulated by the bioavailable copper concentration. Both methane monooxygenase enzymes are metalloenzymes, but that is the extent of their similarity. The two systems differ in molecular structure, metal ion composition, and substrate specificity.

Whereas particulate methane monooxygenase is more selective toward alkanes and alkenes that are five carbons or less, substrates for soluble methane monooxygenase include alkanes, alkenes, aromatics, and halogenated hydrocarbons.

Activation of oxygen by soluble methane monooxygenase and related enzymes has been investigated extensively. In contrast, the metal content, organization, and location of the active site in particulate methane monooxygenase have been and continue to be controversial. It is only recently that enough information on particulate methane monooxygenase has been obtained to begin thinking about oxygen activation chemistry. In the past five years, there have been significant advances in the biochemical, spectroscopic, structural, and mechanistic characterization of particulate methane monooxygenase. In this Account, we highlight recent discoveries, with an emphasis on their relevance to oxygen activation chemistry.


## Overall Architecture of particulate methane monooxygenase

The two point eight angstrom resolution crystal structure of Methylococcus capsulatus particulate methane monooxygenase revealed its overall architecture for the first time. Particulate methane monooxygenase consists of three subunits, pmoA, pmoB, and pmoC, with molecular masses of approximately twenty-four, forty-seven, and twenty-two kilodaltons, respectively. The three subunits assemble into a cylindrical trimeric structure that is approximately one hundred five angstroms in height and approximately ninety angstroms in diameter. The pmoA and pmoC subunits comprise the bulk of the membrane-spanning regions and are composed of seven and five transmembrane helices, respectively. In contrast, pmoB includes two distinct cupredoxin-like beta barrels linked by two transmembrane helices and a long loop region. The beta barrels from pmoB form a soluble domain that houses two of the three metal centers identified in each protomer in the crystal structure.

In addition to the crystal structure, Dalton and co-workers determined the structure of Methylococcus capsulatus particulate methane monooxygenase by electron microscopy. Although the twenty-three angstrom resolution cryo-electron microscopy structure limits detailed comparisons with the crystallographic data, two observations are particularly significant. First, the electron microscopy structure represents an active complex and agrees well with the overall oligomeric state and architecture of the subunits in the crystal structure. Thus, the crystal structure of particulate methane monooxygenase is physiologically relevant. Second, the identification of side "holes" in the soluble regions near the membrane interface are hypothesized to serve as entry points for hydrophobic substrates. A central cavity, present in both X-ray and electron microscopy structures, may function in product egress. Recent cryo-electron microscopy studies suggest that the particulate methane monooxygenase trimer forms a larger assembly with methanol dehydrogenase, the subsequent enzyme in the methanotroph metabolic pathway. In the complex, methanol dehydrogenase is proposed to interact with the soluble beta-barrel regions of pmoB.


## Particulate methane monooxygenase Metal Centers

Metal Ion Composition. Early analyses of the particulate methane monooxygenase metal content suggested that copper is the primary metal involved in methane oxidation. Different groups have reported copper stoichiometries for purified Methylococcus capsulatus particulate methane monooxygenase of two, two to three, eight to ten, and fifteen to twenty copper ions per one hundred kilodalton protomer. Purified particulate methane monooxygenase from Methylosinus trichosporium contains two copper ions per one hundred kilodalton. Iron is generally also present with reported stoichiometries of zero point seven five to two point five ions per one hundred kilodalton. The varying metal ion content highlights the difficulty in the isolation and purification of particulate methane monooxygenase. The discovery of methanobactin, a siderophore-like, copper-binding molecule associated with some preparations, resolves some of the discrepancies, however. The DiSpirito preparation containing eight to ten copper ions actually includes six to eight molecules of methanobactin and two copper ions and is thus consistent with values obtained by us and the Dalton group. Most but not all iron-containing particulate methane monooxygenase preparations exhibit spectroscopic features characteristic of heme, suggesting that the iron derives from contaminants in the membrane fractions.

Spectroscopic Data. Both membrane-bound and purified particulate methane monooxygenase have been studied extensively by spectroscopic techniques. Prior to the crystal structure, these data were used to suggest models for the metal centers. At this point, we are trying to reconcile these data with the crystal structure to assess the physiological relevance of the structure and to glean more detailed information on the metal coordination environments and oxidation states. Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy has been widely used to investigate particulate methane monooxygenase. Chan and co-workers report a broad isotropic signal at g approximately two point one, which was proposed to derive from a ferromagnetically coupled trinuclear copper cluster. Because no trinuclear copper center is present in the structure, alternative interpretations for this signal, such as methanobactin, superposition of a radical signal with a type two copper signal, copper ferricyanide, or adventitiously bound copper ions, might be more reasonable. All researchers observe a type two copper signal for both membrane-bound and purified particulate methane monooxygenase. This signal accounts for forty to fifty percent of the total copper present, disappears upon chemical reduction, and is not altered by the addition of azide or cyanide.

The X-ray absorption near edge spectra of purified pMMO samples exhibit a feature at eight thousand nine hundred eighty-four electron volts, attributable to a Cu one S to four P transition. This peak increases in intensity upon chemical reduction with dithionite, indicating that some of the copper ions are present as Cu two plus in purified pMMO. Treatment with hydrogen peroxide diminishes this peak, suggesting that some oxidation can occur. Complete oxidation might require turnover in the presence of a substrate. Extended X-ray absorption fine structure data for purified pMMO are best fit with two Cu-oxygen/nitrogen ligand environments, with Cu-oxygen/nitrogen distances ranging from one point nine three to two point two two angstroms. A second scattering interaction is best fit with a Cu-Cu interaction at two point five one angstroms for as-isolated pMMO and two point six five angstroms for pMMO reduced with dithionite. This Cu-Cu interaction was critical to our crystallographic model of the dicopper center because two point eight angstrom resolution data cannot necessarily resolve two copper ions at such a close distance. The extended X-ray absorption fine structure data also support the presence of exogenous ligands because the coordination number of two to four for the oxygen/nitrogen ligands exceeds the two nitrogen ligands coordinated to each copper ion in the crystal structure. Furthermore, the pMMO extended X-ray absorption fine structure resembles that of dicopper model compounds, in which the copper ions are four- and five-coordinate.

Possible Oxidation States. When the spectroscopic data are taken together with the structure, they suggest several possible schemes for the oxidation states of the pMMO metal centers. We consider these scenarios in the context of three findings: all pMMO samples, including those from M. trichosporium O B three b and M. capsulatus, strain M, exhibit a type two Cu two plus signal that disappears upon reduction, extended X-ray absorption fine structure data indicate an increase in the Cu-Cu distance upon reduction, and as-isolated pMMO contains a mixture of Cu one plus and Cu two plus. An additional consideration, on the basis of the sequence conservation of the metal ligands, is that the mononuclear copper center observed in the M. capsulatus (Bath) pMMO crystal structure may not be conserved in pMMOs from other methanotrophs. A caveat to this discussion is that, although the EXAFS samples did not photoreduce during data collection, we cannot exclude the possibility of instantaneous photoreduction upon exposure to X-rays, which would complicate a comparison of EPR and EXAFS data.

In the first scenario, the dicopper center is occupied by EPR silent, antiferromagnetically coupled copper two copper two and the mononuclear copper site is copper two, giving rise to the type two signal. Upon reduction, the dinuclear site would be converted to copper one copper two, explaining the increase in the copper-copper distance observed by EXAFS. However, the XANES spectra indicate the presence of copper one in the as-isolated pMMO, which would only be consistent with this model if the zinc site were loaded with copper two. If the mononuclear copper site is not present in all pMMOs, the spectroscopic data are not compatible with the first scenario. Another possibility is that the dicopper site is copper one copper two and the mononuclear copper site is EPR-active copper two. The zinc site could be occupied by either copper one or copper two. If pMMOs from other organisms have the dicopper and zinc sites and lack the mononuclear copper site, the zinc site would have to be occupied by copper one. One issue with this scenario is that the increase in the copper-copper distance upon reduction would have to be attributed to a change other than redox chemistry. Finally, the dicopper center could be a trapped valence copper one copper two site. The type two signal would then derive from the dicopper site, and reduction would result in the loss of the EPR signal as well as an increase in the copper-copper distance. Copper at the mononuclear and zinc sites could either be copper one or copper two. Because site-directed mutagenesis is currently not an option for pMMO, which is obtained directly from methanotrophs rather than from a heterologous expression system, other methods to distinguish among these scenarios, including spectroscopic and structural characterization of pMMOs from other methanotrophs, must be pursued.


## In Search of the Active Site

Subunit Localization. Prior to the crystal structure, experiments using radiolabeled acetylene, a suicide substrate, were used to probe the active-site location. In three different studies, the twenty-four kilodalton pmoA subunit was labeled. Similar studies with the related enzyme ammonia monooxygenase are consistent with this result, with a twenty-eight kilodalton subunit acquiring the label. Some labeling of the forty-seven kilodalton pmoB subunit was also observed. The labeling is believed to derive from an activated acetylene intermediate that covalently modifies residues in the active site or nearby. These data thus suggest that the active site is located in the pmoA subunit with perhaps some involvement of pmoB. According to the crystal structure, pmoA is the least involved in metal coordination, contributing only Glu one ninety-five to the zinc site. If the zinc site represents the location of the active site, it is curious that pmoC, which contributes the other three ligands, is not modified. One way to explain the acetylene-labeling results is to consider a cluster of hydrophilic residues in pmoA adjacent to the zinc site. These residues, which include His thirty-eight, Met forty-two, Asp forty-seven, Asp forty-nine, and Glu one hundred as well as Glu one fifty-four from pmoC, are highly conserved and could conceivably form a metal-binding site that was depleted during purification and or crystallization. Labeling of pmoB is easier to rationalize because both the mono- and dinuclear copper centers are located within this subunit.

The structural data offer an explanation for why pmoA and pmoB might both be labeled. Dalton and co-workers suggest that the side "holes" observed in the cryo-EM and


## Structure and Mechanism of pMMO Balasubramanian and Rosenzweig

crystal structures represent a route for substrate entry. These openings are near the pmoB dicopper center as well as the zinc site and adjacent pmoA hydrophilic cluster. One possibility is that labeled acetylene products diffuse to the two locations, exploiting these "holes". Diffusion between these sites in pmoB and pmoA may be further enhanced by two adjacent cavities. The first is lined by several conserved hydrophobic residues, including Pro ninety-four from pmoB and Leu seventy-eight, Ile one sixty-three, and Val one sixty-four from pmoC. The second includes some of the same residues and extends to the zinc site. Although these observations do not address the exact location of the active site, they do help solve the puzzle of the acetylene labeling data. A corollary to this argument is that the active site probably is not located at the pmoB mononuclear copper center because there is not an obvious path for diffusion of acetylene intermediates from this location to the pmoA subunit.

Active-Site Identity. Detailed knowledge of the identity, coordination environment, and oxidation state of the active site is critical to understand how pMMO activates oxygen. There are five possibilities for the active site: the pmoB mononuclear copper center, the pmoC pmoA zinc center, the pmoB dinuclear copper center, the pmoA hydrophilic cluster, and the trinuclear cluster proposed by Chan and co-workers. At this juncture, the mononuclear copper site in pmoB seems unlikely because all of the ligands to the metal at this site are not conserved. Because no evidence for a trinuclear copper cluster was found in the crystal structure, we will not consider this option either, although methane hydroxylation at such a site has been investigated recently by density functional theory calculations. There is currently no evidence for metal binding at the pmoA hydrophilic cluster either. The remaining two options, the pmoC pmoA zinc center and the pmoB dinuclear copper center, warrant further discussion.

Oxygen Activation at a Mononuclear Copper Center. Even though the pmoB mononuclear copper site has been discounted, the possibility of oxygen activation at a mononuclear copper center remains if the pmoC pmoA zinc center contains copper in vivo. In considering this site, it is important to note that the ligands will likely be different from those coordinating zinc in the crystal structure. For example, several potential copper ligands, such as Met one hundred ninety-nine from pmoA, are in the vicinity. Binding and activation of O two occurs at mononuclear copper centers in the enzymes peptidylglycine alpha-hydroxylating monooxygenase (PHM), which hydroxylates the alpha atom of a terminal glycine residue, and dopamine beta-hydroxylase (DBM), which converts dopamine to norepinephrine. In PHM, there are two noncoupled mononuclear copper centers, CuA and CuB, that are separated by eleven angstroms. Substrate and O two bind at the CuB site, which is coordinated by two histidines, a methionine, and a solvent molecule. Crystals of PHM soaked with substrate analogues under reducing conditions show electron density at the CuB site that is best modeled as O two. Surprisingly, O two binds with an end-on eta one geometry, with distances of two point one and two point eight angstroms from the copper ion to the two oxygen atoms. This crystallographic model is consistent with biochemical and computational data, suggesting that Cu two-superoxide is the reactive species, as well as with the recent characterization of an end-on eta one superoxo-Cu two complex that is able to hydroxylate and hydroperoxylate phenols.

Could a similar species be important in pMMO? One difference is that the C-H bond dissociation energy in methane is one hundred four kilocalories per mole as compared to eighty-seven kilocalories per mole for the PHM substrate. In addition, DFT calculations suggest that Cu two-superoxide cannot abstract a hydrogen atom from methane. On the basis of calculations using a model with two imidazoles and one acetate to mimic the pmoB monocopper center, Yoshizawa and Shiota propose a mechanism for methane hydroxylation involving a Cu three-oxo reactive species. According to their hypothesis, the initial reaction of Cu one with O two results in Cu two-superoxide, which is converted to Cu two-hydroperoxide by hydrogen atom transfer from a tyrosine residue in the active site. Abstraction of a hydrogen atom from a second tyrosine would then yield the Cu three-oxo species and a water molecule. The idea that tyrosine residues are involved derives from mechanistic proposals for PHM and DBM, which have actually been ruled out by mutagenesis data. Yoshizawa and Shiota invoke participation of specific tyrosine residues near the pmoB mononuclear copper center. Their proposal could be modified to apply to the zinc site because two conserved tyrosines, Tyr one hundred ninety-six from pmoA and Tyr one hundred seventy-eight from pmoC, are adjacent. At present, these ideas remain highly speculative.

O two Activation at a Dinuclear Copper Center. The case for the dicopper center as the active site is stronger than that for a monocopper center for several reasons. First, all of the ligands to this site are highly conserved. Second, the existence of the dicopper center is clear from both EXAFS and crystallographic data. In contrast, the pmoB monocopper center observed in the crystal structure may not be conserved, and the existence of a monocopper center at the crystallographic zinc site has not been established definitively. Third, a bis(mu-oxo)dicopper core in copper-loaded zeolites has been demonstrated to oxidize methane selectively. Fourth, there is ample


## Structure and Mechanism of pMMO Balasubramanian and Rosenzweig

precedence for O two binding and activation at dinuclear copper centers. In tyrosinase and catechol oxidase, dicopper centers catalyze the hydroxylation of tyrosine and the conversion of catechols to quinones, respectively. The active sites in these enzymes differ from the pMMO dicopper center, in that the two copper ions are ligated by six rather than three histidines and the Cu-Cu distances are longer. In these enzymes, the active species is likely to be a side-on eta two two eta two peroxo dicopper two complex. The isoelectronic species in which the peroxo O-O bond is cleaved to yield a bis(mu-oxo)dicopper three complex has been characterized in model compounds, although not yet in biology. Interconversion between the bis (mu-oxo)dicopper three and eta two two eta two peroxo dicopper two cores has been observed for many synthetic systems and is the subject of several theoretical studies.

Could one of these moieties be involved in methane oxidation by pMMO? By analogy to the above enzymes and model complexes, O two could react with a dicopper one center in pMMO to yield either a eta two two eta two peroxo dicopper two or a bis(mu-oxo)dicopper three species. Injection of an electron might then generate the mixed valent bis(mu-oxo) Cu twoCu three complex, which has been suggested to be more reactive. Yoshizawa and Shiota have investigated this possibility by computational methods. Using a dicopper model ligated by three imidazoles and one acetate, their results suggest that the mixed valent species is more reactive than the bis(mu-oxo)dicopper three species and better suited to activation of the C-H bond in methane. Although the mixed valent species is similar in reactivity to the mononuclear Cu three-oxo complex, its formation is energetically more favorable. One important caveat to these results is that the assumed starting model may not represent the dinuclear copper center accurately. In particular, residue Glu thirty-five is modeled as a ligand, although its side-chain oxygen atoms are greater than four angstroms from the copper ions in the crystallographic model. In addition, the Cu-Cu distance of two point six five angstroms in reduced pMMO is significantly shorter than that the greater than four angstrom Cu-Cu distance observed in reduced catechol oxidase and tyrosinase.

Catalytic Mechanism. According to DFT calculations, methane oxidation by the mononuclear Cu three-oxo species discussed above begins with methane weakly bound to the monocopper center followed by C-H bond cleavage, formation of a nonradical intermediate, and recombination of OH and CH three. A similar mechanism was computed for the bis (mu-oxo)Cu twoCu three complex. Chan and co-workers have investigated the pMMO mechanism using M. capsulatus (Bath) membrane preparations. Hydroxylation of both chiral ethane and chiral butane proceeds with the retention of the configuration. These data combined with hydrogen deuterium kinetic isotope effects are consistent with a concerted, nonradical mechanism. In other studies, the absence of a carbon kinetic isotope effect for propane oxidation was interpreted as evidence of minimal structural change at the carbon center during transition-state formation in the rate-limiting step.


## Conclusions

Recent structural, biochemical, and spectroscopic data have provided the first steps toward understanding O2 activation by pMMO. Although the active site has not yet been identified, the dinuclear copper site in the P-M-O-B subunit or an uncharacterized hydrophilic site within the membrane region is the most likely candidate. Further structural and spectroscopic studies are necessary to elucidate the detailed coordination environments of the metal centers, including the possible presence of exogenous ligands. Parallel investigations of pMMOs from different organisms may also help pinpoint which metal center activates O2. If possible, mutagenesis approaches would be extremely informative. Once the active site is identified, the real quest for understanding the methane hydroxylation mechanism can be initiated.